Title: MatchingPolicy: Correspondence-Aware Policy Enables Cross-Object In-Context Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16715v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 02:16:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# MatchingPolicy: Correspondence-Aware Policy Enables Cross-Object In-Context Learning 

## Qijin She * Hanyang Yu * Zeming Li Ping Tan †   

> qijinshe@outlook.com hanyangyu1021@gmail.com zlikp@connect.ust.hk pingtan@ust.hk

## Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Hong Kong SAR, China 

## Abstract 

In-context imitation learning enables few-shot policy gener-alization but struggles to maintain performance on unseen objects and novel scenarios. To address this, we introduce MatchingPolicy, a correspondence-driven framework that explicitly decouples demonstration-to-scene matching from policy learning. Central to our method is a correspondence-aware diffusion policy that conditions robotic actions di-rectly on dense semantic correspondences. This archi-tectural separation resolves the inherent conflict between correspondence identification and action adaptation, en-abling robust out-of-distribution transfer. Our framework integrates vision foundation models with a novel two-stage matching algorithm to dynamically establish reliable cor-respondences. Extensive evaluations on RLBench and real-world manipulation tasks confirm that MatchingPol-icy achieves superior few-shot performance, generalizing reliably across unseen object instances and semantic cat-egories. Visualization results are available at https: //matchingpolicy.github.io .

## 1. Introduction 

Imitation learning has demonstrated remarkable potential in acquiring diverse manipulation skills. However, traditional approaches typically require a large amount of costly, task-specific demonstration data to train a policy for even a sin-gle skill. While recent efforts have sought to train univer-sal, multi-task imitation policies [25] on large and diverse robotic datasets [33], these models still struggle to general-ize to entirely new tasks, and often depend on task-specific fine-tuning to reach acceptable performance. Inspired by breakthroughs in language and vision, in-context learning has recently been introduced to robotic policy learning [10] 

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

as a way to bypass fine-tuning. In this paradigm, a model is conditioned at test time on a few task demonstrations that provide fine-grained, step-by-step guidance, rather than coarse natural language commands, enabling the policy to adapt to unseen tasks on the fly. Despite this promise, prior in-context learning ap-proaches for robotics often fail to generalize to novel ob-jects and tasks, even when the demonstrations feature the exact unseen task and object [19]. We argue that a key reason for this shortcoming is that current methods ask a single model to simultaneously: (1) infer precise cor-respondences between the demonstration and the current scene from scratch using limited robotic-domain data, and (2) adapt the demonstrated motions to the new objects and scenes. This dual burden can hinder both correspondence extraction and action adaptation, especially in visually di-verse or geometrically complex environments. To address this challenge, we propose MatchingPolicy, a novel in-context imitation learning framework for robotic manipulation that explicitly decouples correspondence ex-traction from policy learning. Rather than forcing the policy to implicitly discover correspondences, we leverage explic-itly pre-computed correspondences and focus on training a policy that adapts robot behavior accordingly. Additionally, we introduce an online adaptive semantic matching algo-rithm that dynamically establishes dense and reliable corre-spondences between demonstrations and the current scene. Our correspondence-aware policy offers three key ad-vantages. First, by leveraging explicit correspondences be-tween the demonstration and the current scene, the pol-icy can more precisely localize task-relevant interaction re-gions, enabling more accurate and adaptive action gener-ation. Second, as the policy operates on correspondence features rather than raw visual object representations, it be-comes inherently object-agnostic, substantially enhancing its ability to generalize across different object instances and categories. Third, the decoupled design, separating corre-spondence extraction from policy learning, facilitates the arXiv:2608.16715v1 [cs.RO] 17 Aug 2026 seamless integration of powerful off-the-shelf visual and se-mantic matching methods [32, 48] without retraining. Our results show that the proposed MatchingPolicy out-performs the state-of-the-art in-context imitation learning method on the RLBench [20]. We further validate our approach on a set of challenging real-world manipulation tasks, where it demonstrates strong generalization to a wide variety of objects. The main contributions are as follows: • We propose a novel approach that separates cross-scene correspondence extraction from policy learning, empow-ered by a correspondence-aware policy conditioned on the extracted explicit correspondences, thereby enhanc-ing flexibility and scalability. • We design a novel diffusion policy biased to leverage di-rect relationships from explicit correspondences, improv-ing the model’s generalization across tasks and objects. • We introduce an online adaptive matching algorithm that dynamically provides reliable correspondences during ex-ecution, enabling precise real-world policy adaptation. • We conduct extensive evaluations of our method in both simulation and real-world settings. The results demon-strate that the proposed approach achieves strong few-shot performance, while also exhibiting robust cross-instance and even cross-category generalization. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Multi-task Imitation Learning 

A growing body of work focuses on developing general-ist robot policies [3, 7, 21, 25, 27, 28, 40]. These models, typically conditioned on visual observations and language instructions, are trained on large-scale robotic datasets in real world [5, 24, 33] or in simulation [20, 31] and achieve strong performance on the tasks seen during training. With appropriate visual inputs and language prompts, they can generalize zero-shot to related tasks and scenes under vary-ing visual conditions. However, their performance often degrades on entirely unseen tasks, additional fine-tuning is usually required to attain acceptable results. Our method bypasses the task generalization obstacle by directly condi-tioning the policy on demonstration, which showcases the fine-grained intention of the task more effectively. 

2.2. In-context Imitation Learning 

In-context learning (ICL) has emerged as a powerful paradigm, enabling models to adapt to novel tasks of lan-guage [4], vision [50] and sequential decision making [36] from only a handful of demonstrations without retrain-ing. In robotics, explicit ICL-based approaches often begin by establishing correspondences between given demonstra-tions and a new scene, followed by transforming the trajec-tories using handcrafted heuristics [15, 39, 49, 51]. While effective in controlled settings, they typically demand con-siderable human effort and their adaptability to truly novel scenarios remains constrained. The in-context capability of LLMs has also been adapted to robotic action prediction [8, 47]. However, these methods usually run in open-loop and face difficulty to efficiently predict accurate motions. Recent studies have pursued training in-context policy models directly, leveraging transformers [10, 19] or graph neural networks [41] to minimize human involvement. In contrast, MatchingPolicy adopts a direct and modular strat-egy: it explicitly extracts correspondence information from Vision Foundation Models (VFMs), freeing the policy to focus solely on adapting robot actions to the new environ-ment. This decoupled design not only reduces manual inter-vention but also enhances generalization to novel objects. Recent works [37, 38] employ a similar modular design, decoupling relationship extraction between demonstrations and the current scene from action prediction using retrieval-augmented generation. In contrast, our method extracts dense point-wise correspondences, which not only provide a similarity measure but also delivers fine-grained spatial cues that facilitate robot action prediction. 

2.3. Keypoint-based Policy Learning 

Keypoint-based representations are widely used in robotics because of the sparsity and interpretability [11, 34]. They also serve as high-level abstract action representations, ei-ther predicted by large language models (LLMs) [17, 18] or generated by learned policies [2, 44, 45], and can be mapped to low-level robotic control, enabling LLM-driven manipu-lation and cross-embodiment policy transfer. Recently, several works have integrated keypoint-based representation into policy training as observations [9, 13, 26, 42, 43], demonstrating improved generalization to novel scenes and objects and improving the data efficiency. These methods typically rely on pre-defined keypoints, either se-lected manually or determined via unsupervised clustering, which can limit the policy’s adaptability to novel scenar-ios. Our work differs in two key aspects: 1) Task Scope: prior works focus on single-task imitation learning, whereas MatchingPolicy targets in-context multi-task learning; 2) Key Point Adaptation: instead of static pre-defined key points, our method dynamically generates key points based on matching confidence and visibility. This eliminates hu-man effort while ensuring better feature alignment. 

## 3. Method 

Problem Formulation We address robotic manipulation in a few-shot, in-context learning setting. Given a small set of N demonstrations {Dj }Nj=1 , where N ∈ { 1, 2}, the goal is to leverage these demonstrations to perform the same task depicted in the demos, but in a novel scene. The policy observation of the current scene is repre-sented by a state sc = (Pc, g c). Here, Pc denotes the …

# … 

> … …
> 150k Demos 50k Objects Figure 1. The overview of MatchingPolicy. Correspondence points are extracted using a two-stage feature matching algorithm with VFMs and subsequently passed into a graph-based diffusion policy model to predict 6D gripper poses. These predicted motions are then translated into robot joint commands, with the model trained end-to-end on our synthetic dataset.

3D point cloud, obtained from RGB-D images and trans-formed into the gripper’s local coordinate frame via the gripper pose Tc ∈ SE(3) , while gc ∈ { 0, 1} represents a bi-nary gripper state. Similarly, a demonstration Dj is a time-indexed sequence of L states, Dj = ( sj,t )Lt=1 , where each 

sj,t = ( Pj,t , g j,t ) follows the same definition as sc. Given the current state sc and the demonstration set {Dj }Nj=1 , the policy π predicts a horizon of K future actions (ak)Kk=1 ,where ak = (∆ Tk, g k) comprises a relative gripper trans-formation ∆Tk and a target gripper state gk. Formally, the objective is to learn a policy that models the conditional dis-tribution π = p(a1: K | sc, (Dj )Nj=1 ). For convenience, we use the term ”frame” to refer uniformly to the current state, a demonstration state, or a predicted action, drawing a direct analogy to frames in a video. 

Method Overview The pipeline of our method is shown in Fig. 1. Our key insight is to decouple correspondence extraction from action prediction. Rather than requiring the policy to infer demonstration-current alignment im-plicitly, we first explicitly establish semantic correspon-dences between the current observation and the demon-stration frames. Based on these correspondences, we se-lect a sparse set of keypoints in the current frame together with their matched counterparts across the demonstrations. These correspondence-indexed point sets provide a struc-tured context that captures task-relevant spatial and tempo-ral cues from the demonstrations. Given this structured con-text, our correspondence-aware policy predicts future end-effector motions for the current scene. The policy treats the established correspondences as an explicit prior for rout-ing information from demonstrations to the current obser-vation and to future action predictions, enabling it to gen-erate actions consistent with the demonstrated intent. The predicted end-effector motions are then converted into exe-cutable robot actions with inverse kinematics. During training, we use our synthetic demonstration dataset with ground-truth correspondences (Sec. 3.2) to su-pervise the correspondence-aware policy (Sec. 3.1). At de-ployment time, where ground-truth correspondences are un-available, we combine vision foundation models with visual point trackers to extract semantic and spatio-temporal cor-respondences from real-world observations (Sec. 3.3). The resulting correspondences are used by the same policy with-out changing the action prediction module. 

3.1. Correspondence-Aware Diffusion Policy 

Keypoint Selection with Correspondence. To reduce network burden and improve robustness, we select scene keypoints from the current frame by considering both geometric coverage and correspondence reliability across demonstrations. Specifically, a point is retained as a can-didate only if it has semantically matched counterparts in most demonstration frames, which filters out unstable matches caused by occlusions or errors from vision founda-tion models. We then apply Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) to the candidate set to obtain a spatially representative and diverse subset of scene keypoints, and select their matched points in the demonstration frames accordingly. In addition to scene keypoints, we include a fixed set of gripper keypoints to represent the gripper pose and state. Unlike scene keypoints, gripper keypoints have known one-to-one correspondences across frames by con-struction. Together, the selected scene and gripper key-Figure 2. Our Correspondence-Aware Policy Model. Left: The selected correspondence key points on 2D images of demonstration frames, current frame, and action frames. Right: The structure of our graph-based policy model. The red lines with two-way arrow indicate the one-to-one mapping between the graph nodes in the network and the key points in the current frame. Node lines indicate data transfer. The lines connecting the two frames are a simplified view; the detailed node-to-node links are omitted for visual clarity 

points form correspondence-indexed entities: each selected current-frame keypoint is associated with matched demon-stration keypoints under the same correspondence iden-tity. These identities serve as the structural prior for our correspondence-conditioned policy. 

Correspondence-Conditioned Action Prediction. Our policy uses the correspondence-indexed entities as an ex-plicit structural prior for action prediction. Although the estimated correspondences may still be imperfect, they pro-vide strong cues about which parts of the demonstrations should influence the current scene. We organize the in-put around these correspondence identities. Specifically, we group nodes into demonstration frames {Dj }Nj=1 , the current frame sc, and K action frames (ak)Kk=1 , where ac-tion frames represent future gripper pose and states. Each frame contains Mg = 6 gripper nodes and Ms = 16 scene nodes. Nodes sharing the same index are treated as corre-sponding entities: the m-th scene node in a demonstration frame and the current frame refer to matched scene key-points, while the m-th gripper node across current and ac-tion frames refers to the same gripper keypoint. In demon-stration and current frames, gripper nodes store 3D gripper-keypoint positions and the gripper state, while scene nodes store selected scene-keypoint positions. In action frames, gripper nodes store the predicted displacement of gripper keypoints relative to the current frame, and scene nodes are copied from the current frame as a fixed scene reference. Since the representation consists of sparse keypoints with structured spatial, temporal, and correspondence re-lations, a graph structure with message passing provides a natural way to route information among them, as shown on the right of Fig. 2. The information flow is defined by three types of relations. First, cross-frame correspondence edges connect each current-frame node to its corresponding nodes in the demonstration frames, and also connect correspond-ing nodes between adjacent demonstration frames. These orange edges in Fig. 2 provide direct pathways for transfer-ring demonstrated intent through matched keypoints. Sec-ond, intra-frame spatial edges fully connect gripper and scene nodes within each demonstration, current, and action frame. These gray edges model the spatial configuration of each frame and allow correspondence information received by scene nodes to propagate to gripper nodes, which are then used for action prediction. For these spatial edges, we use the relative Cartesian displacement between nodes as the edge attribute. Third, action-frame consistency edges connect gripper nodes in each action frame to their corre-sponding nodes in the current frame, as well as preceding action frames. These blue edges anchor future gripper key-points to the current observation and encourage temporally consistent predictions. After predicting gripper-keypoint displacements, we recover the relative gripper pose trans-formation ∆Tk for each action frame using SVD [1]. Over-all, correspondence information is routed from demonstra-tions to the current scene, grounded through scene-gripper spatial relations, and decoded into future gripper motion. 

Local Geometric Refinement. The selected keypoints provide only a sparse scene representation, and the esti-mated correspondences can be noisy or ambiguous. To improve robustness, we attach local geometric evidence to each selected scene keypoint. Each unselected point in the point cloud is assigned to its nearest selected keypoint, forming local point groups around correspondence-indexed scene nodes. These groups are processed by a local Point-Net encoder [35], pre-trained with a geometric reconstruc-tion objective [30]. The resulting features summarize fine-15k 

> trajectory sets pick-and-place 26.7% open/close 13.3% grasp 13.3% other 33.3% push/pull 13.3%
> Insertion / removal Rotation / twisting Hanging / hooking Stacking / assembly Pressing / toggling Sorting / arranging 5k low-frequency task groups

MatchingDataset    

> Manipulated Objects
> 50k+
> ICL Trajectories
> 150k+
> MatchingEngine
> Spatial Gen Correspondences
> DEMO one trajectory set
> 1234
> ... N

Figure 3. Overview of M ATCHING DATASET , M ATCHING ENGINE 

spatially retargets each reference demonstration to produce task-consistent trajectories with ground-truth 3D correspondences. 

grained local shape evidence around each scene keypoint. Through intra-frame spatial edges, these scene-level geo-metric features are propagated to gripper nodes, allowing local shape evidence to refine action predictions when cor-respondence information alone is incomplete or unreliable. 

Diffusion-based Action Decoding. We train the policy with a diffusion-based action decoding objective. Given ground-truth gripper-keypoint positions and gripper states in the action frames, Gaussian noise is iteratively added to transform them into a normal distribution. The policy predicts the denoising target for each action-frame gripper node: ϵθ = [ ∇pt, ∇pR, ∇a] ∈ R7, where ∇pt and ∇pR

denote translation- and rotation-induced displacements, and 

∇a denotes the gripper-state residual. This decomposition prevents large translational motion from dominating smaller rotational keypoint displacements. The model is optimized with the standard denoising MSE objective [16]. 

3.2. MATCHING DATASET : Correspondence-Rich In-context Learning Data 

To train an in-context imitation policy, we require intent-consistent trajectories across diverse scene configurations, together with 3D correspondences across the scenes and tra-jectories. Existing robot datasets, however, are limited in task and object diversity. We therefore design M ATCHING -DATASET based on two observations: (i) the policy mainly relies on the relationship between the demonstration and the target scene, rather than object geometry or realistic task appearance; and (ii) cross-scene correspondences are readily available in simulation due to accessible ground-truth poses. As a result, we build a large-scale synthetic manipulation dataset with 15K intent-consistent task sets, over 150K trajectories, and more than 50K manipulated-object instances. The dataset uses task-relevant meshes sampled from ShapeNet [6] and covers both common ma-nipulation behaviors and diverse low-frequency tasks under varied scene configurations, as shown in Fig. 3. Each trajectory set is initialized from a procedurally con-structed reference demonstration. The variant object-centric Embedding Embedding Embedding Embedding Embedding Embedding    

> (a) (b) (c)
> airbot 6DoF arm
> view-0 view-1 view-2 view-1 view-0 view-2
> Demo Test

Figure 4. Real-world Setup and Matching (a) Camera setup (b) View matching based on the average features of segmented ob-jects. (c) Point matching on objects for matched image pairs. 

trajectories are spatially retargeted by adjusting object poses and scene layouts, while preserving the robot-object relative poses at key frames. As a result, the generated trajectories exhibit diverse observations, robot motions, and spatial con-figurations, yet maintain the same underlying task intent. Observations are captured as RGB-D point clouds using vir-tual cameras to mimic realistic manipulation scenarios. For each object mesh, we pre-sample a dense surface point tem-plate in its local coordinate frame, which serves as a canon-ical representation shared by all trajectories in the same set. Since ground-truth object poses are available in simulation, the template can be transformed into each scene and time step, allowing observed object points to be associated with their corresponding template points. Cross-scene and cross-trajectory 3D correspondences are then computed through this shared template space. Some template points may not find valid matches in certain time steps in demonstrations within the distance threshold, mimicking real-world partial observations. Each trajectory contains synchronized RGB-D observations, point clouds, and the associated correspon-dence annotations. Further details on data generation and annotation are provided in Appendix 6. 

3.3. Real-world Correspondence Integration via VLMs 

An advantage of our method is its plug-and-play ability to incorporate off-the-shelf vision foundation models at test time. Given demonstrations and a novel scene of the same task, we sample object-centric candidate points in the ini-tial observations, match them across scenes using VFM fea-tures [14], propagate the matched points over time with a point tracker [23], and lift valid 2D matches and tracks to a shared 3D world frame for action prediction. 

Inter-scene Correspondence via Semantic Matching 

We establish semantic correspondences between the ini-tial frames of the demonstrations and the current scene following the dense feature matching paradigm of recent VFM-based methods [48]. For each RGB-D observation, we segment the target object region, extract dense descrip-tors within the object mask, and L2-normalize them before matching. Given a pair of aligned views, we compute 2D correspondences by nearest-neighbor search in descriptor space. For a candidate pixel u in one masked image, its correspondence in the paired image is 

v∗ = arg max 

> v∈Mb

Fa(u)⊤Fb(v),

where Fa and Fb are the normalized dense descriptors of the two images, and Mb is the target object mask in the paired image. The resulting matches provide semantic 2D corre-spondences between demonstration and current scenes. For multi-object tasks, we apply the same procedure indepen-dently within each object mask. Single-view matching can be unreliable under large viewpoint or object-pose changes due to occlusions and ap-pearance variations. To improve robustness, we perform adaptive view alignment before dense matching. Our setup uses three calibrated RGB-D cameras covering approxi-mately 360 ◦, providing complementary observations of the scene. Rather than assuming fixed camera-index correspon-dences, we compare pooled view-level descriptors and se-lect the most compatible view assignment. For a candidate assignment π, we compute 

S(π) = 1

|V| 

X

> i∈V

¯F ⊤ 

> a,i

¯Fb,π (i),

where ¯Fa,i and ¯Fb,π (i) are pooled descriptors from the paired views. We choose π∗ = arg max π S(π) by enu-merating feasible assignments, and perform dense matching only on the top two aligned view pairs under π∗. Although our experiments use three cameras, the formulation natu-rally extends to general multi-view settings. 

Intra-scene Correspondence via Visual Tracking Fol-lowing prior methods [13, 42], we use an off-the-shelf point tracker [23] to propagate correspondences over time. Start-ing from the matched object points in the initial frames, we track their 2D locations through each demonstration se-quence offline and through the online execution sequence at test time. Unlike approaches that rely on sparse, expert-annotated, or clustered keypoints, we track a set of object-centric points, with Ntrack = 512 points per object and cam-era view. Tracking is performed independently for each camera view. For each point, the tracker predicts its 2D location and visibility at each frame, producing temporally consistent image-space trajectories for 3D lifting. 

Geometry-based 3D Lifting and Point Filtering The 3D lifting step is independent of the correspondence source and is applied uniformly to 2D points from semantic match-ing and visual tracking. We maintain a validity mask for each point: a point is valid only if its depth is available in the RGB-D observation, and tracked points must be predicted as visible by the tracker. This filtering removes points with missing depth, occlusion, or unreliable tracking. Valid 2D points are then back-projected using depth and camera cal-ibration into the robot-aligned world frame. Before being passed to the policy, the lifted 3D points at each time step are transformed into the corresponding gripper frame using the inverse gripper pose, yielding temporally consistent 3D point trajectories for downstream manipulation. 

3.4. Implementation Details 

We trained our model using the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5. It took seven days on four NVIDIA A6000 GPUs to train a model for 1M steps. All evaluation was performed on a PC with an RTX 4080 GPU. 

## 4. Experiments 

In this section, we address the following questions: 1) Does 

MatchingPolicy outperform baseline methods overall as it can better utilize explicit correspondences? 2) Can 

MatchingPolicy leverage an off-the-shelf large vision model to facilitate generalization in real-world scenarios? 

4.1. Simulation Experiments 

Evaluation Settings. We first evaluate MatchingPolicy on 36 RLBench [20] simulation tasks covering diverse ob-jects, initial configurations, and interaction patterns. We divide these tasks into three groups: 1) 12 Adaptation Tasks , which are used for fine-tuning to reduce the do-main gap between synthetic pretraining and RLBench; 2) 

12 OOD-Easy Tasks , which are excluded from fine-tuning but share similar interaction structures with the Adaptation Tasks (e.g., closing a box versus opening a box); and 3) 

12 OOD-Hard Tasks , which are also excluded from fine-tuning but involve less familiar interaction patterns, ob-ject affordances, or task semantics. We compare Match-ingPolicy with three representative approaches: Instant-Policy [41], a geometric in-context learning method based on graph neural networks; KAT [8], a keypoint-based in-context learning method that uses LLM reasoning for ac-tion generation; and RDT-1B [28], a representative Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model. Ground-truth correspon-dences in RLBench are obtained following the procedure described in Sec. 6. 

Results. We first compare MatchingPolicy with Instant-Policy on all 36 RLBench tasks. As summarized in Tab. 1, MatchingPolicy achieves higher average success rates across all three task groups. A key strength of Match-ingPolicy is its ability to generalize without task-specific fine-tuning. On several unseen tasks, such as Open Jar and Table 1. Success rates on 36 RLBench tasks. OOD-Easy (Hard) denotes unseen tasks with similar (dissimilar) interaction patterns to the Adaptation Tasks; Results are reported as NoFT/FT, indicating performance without/with fine-tuning on the Adaptation Tasks.                                                                                                                   

> Adaptation Tasks OOD-Easy Tasks OOD-Hard Tasks Task InstantPolicy MatchingPolicy Task InstantPolicy MatchingPolicy Task InstantPolicy 1MatchingPolicy Open Box 0.94/0.99 1.00/1.00 Slide Buzzer 0.35/0.94 0.71/0.74 Close Drawer –/0.00 0.87/0.90 Close Jar 0.58/0.93 0.78/0.92 Plate Out 0.81/0.97 0.96/0.99 Close Grill –/0.00 0.98/0.97 Toilet Seat Down 0.85/0.93 1.00/1.00 Close Laptop 0.91/0.95 1.00/1.00 Open Grill –/0.00 0.97/0.99 Close Microwave 1.00/1.00 0.97/1.00 Close Box 0.77/0.99 1.00/1.00 Pick Up Cup –/0.00 0.90/0.94 Phone on Base 0.98/1.00 1.00/1.00 Open Jar 0.52/0.78 0.89/0.91 Open Door –/0.01 0.99/0.98 Lift Lid 1.00/1.00 1.00/1.00 Toilet Seat Up 0.94/1.00 1.00/1.00 Turn Tap –/0.00 0.98/1.00 Umbrella Out 0.88/0.91 0.92/1.00 Meat off Grill 0.77/0.90 0.82/0.89 Frame Off –/0.00 0.35/0.33 Slide Block 0.75/1.00 0.98/1.00 Open Microwave 0.23/0.56 0.43/0.54 Sweep Dust –/0.00 0.37/0.41 Push Button 0.60/1.00 0.89/1.00 Paper Roll Off 0.70/0.95 0.94/0.96 Open Wine –/0.01 0.69/0.71 Basketball 0.66/0.97 0.87/0.97 Put Rubbish 0.97/0.99 1.00/1.00 Put Money –/0.00 0.52/0.50 Meat on Grill 0.78/1.00 0.83/1.00 Put Umbrella 0.31/0.37 0.33/0.40 Put Roll –/0.00 0.49/0.52 Flip Switch 0.40/0.94 0.90/0.99 Lamp On 0.42/0.41 0.81/0.85 Pull Plug –/0.00 0.48/0.46
> Average 0.79/0.97 0.92/ 0.99 Average 0.60/0.82 0.83/ 0.86 Average –/0.00 0.72/ 0.73
> 1

We test Instant Policy using the official checkpoint. Table 2. Comparison with KAT and RDT-1B on six challenging RLBench tasks. MatchingPolicy achieves the highest average suc-cess rate using only two demonstrations.                                                  

> Task KAT (ICL) RDT-1B (VLA) MatchingPolicy
> D=2 1D=10 2D=0 3D=20 2D=2 1
> Plate Out 0.12 0.36 0.08 0.67 0.96
> Slide Buzzer 0.04 0.19 0.00 0.47 0.71
> Toilet Seat Up 0.25 0.38 0.12 0.69 1.00
> Meat off Grill 0.33 0.54 0.05 0.73 0.77
> Pick Up Cup 0.28 0.47 0.09 0.81 0.94
> Pull Plug 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.32 0.46 Average 0.17 0.34 0.06 0.62 0.81
> Ddenotes demo number. 1Our setup; 2original method setup; 3zero-shot setup.

Lamp On , it even outperforms the baseline after the latter is fine-tuned on the Adaptation Tasks. This advantage is most pronounced on OOD-Hard, where the fine-tuned base-line achieves near-zero performance even when some of the relevant objects have already appeared during adaptation. We hypothesize that the baseline’s strong reliance on object geometry makes it difficult to infer task intent when inter-action patterns change. In contrast, MatchingPolicy condi-tions directly on demonstration-to-scene correspondences, enabling it to transfer interaction patterns with less depen-dence on exact object geometry and generalize more effec-tively to unseen tasks. We further compare MatchingPolicy with two represen-tative baselines on six challenging tasks: KAT, an LLM-based in-context learning method [8], and RDT-1B, a repre-sentative VLA model [28] (Tab. 2). Using only two demon-strations, MatchingPolicy consistently outperforms KAT, even when KAT is provided with ten demonstrations. It also achieves higher success rates than RDT-1B, even after the latter is fine-tuned on 20 demonstrations. Together, these results highlight the effectiveness and demonstration effi-ciency of explicit correspondence modeling compared with LLM-based in-context learning and VLA fine-tuning. 

4.2. Real-World Experiments 

Setup and evaluation Settings. We evaluate Matching-Policy on four real-world manipulation tasks spanning rigid-object and articulated-object manipulation. The ex-periments are conducted using an AirBot Pro 6-DoF robotic arm 1, with the scene captured by three Intel RealSense D435i RGB-D cameras. MatchingPolicy extracts visual and semantic correspondences using off-the-shelf vision foun-dation models and is deployed directly without real-world fine-tuning. To rigorously evaluate generalization, we con-sider three levels of difficulty: Layout-Easy , which uses the same object instances as the demonstrations with mi-nor pose variations; Layout-Hard , which uses the same in-stances with substantial pose variations, including markedly different orientations; and Shape , which uses novel object instances that differ in appearance and geometry. For each task and evaluation setting, we conduct ten trials and report the average success rate. Detailed task illustrations and suc-cess criteria are provided in Sec. 7. 

Overall As shown in Tab. 3, MatchingPolicy substantially outperforms InstantPolicy across all three evaluation set-tings. Its performance remains robust under both layout and object variations, demonstrating strong real-world general-ization without real-world fine-tuning. 

Generalization to novel layout and novel objects We observe that the success rate of InstantPolicy on the Put Lid                                     

> 1https://airbots.online/ Figure 5. Generalization capabilities of MatchingPolicy with a single demonstration. Left: Novel layouts; Right: Unseen object instances Table 3. Results on real-world tasks, evaluated across different levels of generalization.
> Level Method Pour Water Put Lid Open Box Cut Egg Averge
> Layout-Easy InstantPolicy 0/10 9/10 0/10 0/10 22.5% MatchingPolicy 7/10 8/10 9/10 7/10 77.5%
> Layout-Hard InstantPolicy 0/10 0/10 0/10 0/10 0.0% MatchingPolicy 6/10 6/10 8/10 6/10 65.0%
> Shape InstantPolicy 0/10 4/10 0/10 0/10 10.0% MatchingPolicy 8/10 6/10 8/10 7/10 72.5%

task in the Layout-Hard setting drops to 0% . Relying on a coarse geometric representation and biased by the demon-stration trajectory, it fails by grasping the pot instead of the lid. In contrast, our approach leverages VFMs to extract precise semantic correspondences, enabling MatchingPol-icy to identify the lid and complete the task. In more chal-lenging task Open Box , MatchingPolicy can generate suc-cessful trajectories approaching objects from directions to-tally different from that in the demonstration (Fig. 5). This shows our method follows the motion of matched keypoints instead of merely replaying the demonstrated trajectory. In the Shape generalization setting, MatchingPolicy again significantly outperforms the baseline, achieving a 

72 .5% average success rate. As illustrated on the right of Fig. 5, for example, MatchingPolicy successfully completes the Pour Water task even when the teapot differs substan-tially in shape. Remarkably, the policy also demonstrates cross-category generalization on the Put Lid task, correctly placing a lid on a teapot after seeing only a demonstration of placing a lid onto a pot (see our supplemental materials). These results confirm that our method relies on learned cor-respondences and is largely agnostic to object geometry. 

4.3. Ablation Studies 

We conduct comprehensive ablation studies by comparing several variants of our approach. We evaluate our method against variants using a naive matching approach in real-world scenarios. Additionally, we explore test-time plan-                    

> Table 4. Average success rates of our model and ablated variants.
> Matching Planning Layout-Easy Layout-Hard Shape
> Naive Overlap 60.0% 20.0% 45.0% 2-Stage Whole 54.0% 47.5% 57.5% 2-Stage Half 60.0% 45.0% 45.0% 2-Stage Overlap 77.5% 65.0% 72.5%

ning strategies to further enhance our policy’s performance. 

Two-Stage Matching versus Naive 2D-to-3D Matching 

We compare our two-stage matching approach against a 3D naive matching baseline. The baseline, based on [43], projects 2D features into the world frame and fuses them by their 3D coordinates before establishing correspondences. As shown in Tab. 4, our method achieves superior perfor-mance by generating more accurate semantic correspon-dences. We observe that the performance of the naive base-line drops in the Shape and Layout-Hard settings, as naive matching produces many incorrect correspondences which mislead the policy and lead to task failure. 

Test-time Planning Methods We develop a planning strategy adapted from [22] to improve test-time perfor-mance: After the policy predicts K actions, the robot ex-ecutes the first K/ 2 actions. The remaining K/ 2 actions seed the next prediction by replacing the first K/ 2 action of the next action chunk, resulting in an inference process where the first half of an action chunk is denoised for only the final step, while the second half undergoes the full diffu-sion process. We term this strategy “overlapping chunks” and use it in other real-world experiments. We compare it against several alternatives: 1) Whole chunk (“Whole”): the robot executes all K predicted actions. 2) Half chunk (“Half”): the robot executes the first K/ 2 steps and then re-predicts. The results in Tab. 4 demonstrate that “overlap” significantly enhances policy performance. In addition, it improves the smoothness of the resulting trajectories. 5. Conclusions and Limitations 

Conclusions In this work, we introduced MatchingPolicy, a novel correspondence-aware policy that transforms robot actions from demonstrations to new scenes using dense cor-respondence cues. By leveraging off-the-shelf vision foun-dation models with a novel two-stage matching algorithm, our approach enables one-shot imitation on tasks with un-seen objects and different layouts in the real world. Our work demonstrates that explicitly modeling the visual and semantic relationships between the demonstration and the current scene is key to effective in-context imitation learn-ing. This principle of learning from analogy, rather than from vast datasets of robot trials, paves the way for building more generalizable and data-efficient robotic systems. 

Limitations Our method also has limitations. First, we focus primarily on short-horizon manipulation tasks; ex-tending our approach to long-horizon tasks would be a valuable direction for future work. Second, our method considers semi-dynamic scenes and operates at a relatively slow speed, making it difficult to handle highly dynamic tasks such as fling [12]. Third, our view selection process is somehow dependent on our current platform, requiring adaptation on other platforms. We will address them in fu-ture work. 

## References 

[1] K Somani Arun, Thomas S Huang, and Steven D Blostein. Least-squares fitting of two 3-d point sets. IEEE Transac-tions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , (5):698– 700, 1987. 4 [2] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Track2act: Predicting point tracks from internet videos enables generalizable robot manipula-tion. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 306–324. Springer, 2024. 2 [3] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2410.24164 . 2 [4] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakan-tan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Lan-guage models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. 2 [5] Qingwen Bu, Jisong Cai, Li Chen, Xiuqi Cui, Yan Ding, Siyuan Feng, Xindong He, Xu Huang, et al. Agibot world colosseo: A large-scale manipulation platform for scalable and intelligent embodied systems. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2025. 2 [6] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012 , 2015. 5, 12 [7] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158 , 2024. 2 [8] Norman Di Palo and Edward Johns. Keypoint action to-kens enable in-context imitation learning in robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19578 , 2024. 2, 6, 7 [9] Xiaolin Fang, Bo-Ruei Huang, Jiayuan Mao, Jasmine Shone, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Kalm: Keypoint abstraction using large models for object-relative imitation learning. In 2025 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 8307–8314. IEEE, 2025. 2 [10] Letian Fu, Huang Huang, Gaurav Datta, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, William Chung-Ho Panitch, Fangchen Liu, Hui Li, and Ken Goldberg. In-context imitation learning via next-token prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15980 , 2024. 1, 2[11] Jianfeng Gao, Zhi Tao, No´ emie Jaquier, and Tamim As-four. K-vil: Keypoints-based visual imitation learning. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 39(5):3888–3908, 2023. 2 [12] Huy Ha and Shuran Song. Flingbot: The unreasonable ef-fectiveness of dynamic manipulation for cloth unfolding. In 

Conference on Robot Learning , pages 24–33. PMLR, 2022. 9[13] Siddhant Haldar and Lerrel Pinto. Point policy: Unifying observations and actions with key points for robot manipula-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20391 , 2025. 2, 6 [14] Greg Heinrich, Mike Ranzinger, Hongxu Yin, Yao Lu, Jan Kautz, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, and Pavlo Molchanov. Radiov2. 5: Improved baselines for agglomerative vision foundation models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 22487–22497, 2025. 5 [15] Nick Heppert, Max Argus, Tim Welschehold, Thomas Brox, and Abhinav Valada. Ditto: Demonstration imitation by trajectory transformation. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 7565–7572. IEEE, 2024. 2 [16] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 5 [17] Haoxu Huang, Fanqi Lin, Yingdong Hu, Shengjie Wang, and Yang Gao. Copa: General robotic manipulation through spa-tial constraints of parts with foundation models. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 9488–9495. IEEE, 2024. 2 [18] Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Yunzhu Li, Ruohan Zhang, and Li Fei-Fei. Rekep: Spatio-temporal reasoning of rela-tional keypoint constraints for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01652 , 2024. 2 [19] Vidhi Jain, Maria Attarian, Nikhil J Joshi, Ayzaan Wahid, Danny Driess, Quan Vuong, Pannag R Sanketi, Pierre Ser-manet, Stefan Welker, Christine Chan, et al. Vid2robot: End-to-end video-conditioned policy learning with cross-attention transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12943 ,2024. 1, 2 [20] Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and An-drew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-ters , 5(2):3019–3026, 2020. 2, 6 [21] Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Fred-erik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Bc-z: Zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 991– 1002. PMLR, 2022. 2 [22] Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthe-sis. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022. 8[23] Nikita Karaev, Ignacio Rocco, Benjamin Graham, Natalia Neverova, Andrea Vedaldi, and Christian Rupprecht. Co-tracker: It is better to track together. In European conference on computer vision , pages 18–35. Springer, 2024. 5, 6 [24] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ash-win Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yun-liang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, et al. Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12945 , 2024. 2 [25] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. 1, 2 [26] Mara Levy, Siddhant Haldar, Lerrel Pinto, and Abhinav Shirivastava. P3-po: Prescriptive point priors for visuo-spatial generalization of robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06784 , 2024. 2 [27] Haitao Lin, Hanyang Yu, Jingshun Huang, He Zhang, Yonggen Ling, Ping Tan, Xiangyang Xue, and Yanwei Fu. Universal pose pretraining for generalizable vision-language-action policies. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2602, 2026. 2 [28] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipu-lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024. 2, 6, 7 [29] Ajay Mandlekar, Soroush Nasiriany, Bowen Wen, Iretiayo Akinola, Yashraj Narang, Linxi Fan, Yuke Zhu, and Dieter Fox. Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1820–1864, 2023. 12 [30] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4460–4470, 2019. 4 [31] Yao Mu, Tianxing Chen, Shijia Peng, Zanxin Chen, Zeyu Gao, Yude Zou, Lunkai Lin, Zhiqiang Xie, and Ping Luo. Robotwin: Dual-arm robot benchmark with generative digi-tal twins (early version). In European Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 264–273. Springer, 2024. 2 [32] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. 2 [33] Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Ab-hishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Poo-ley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,pages 6892–6903. IEEE, 2024. 1, 2 [34] En Yen Puang, Keng Peng Tee, and Wei Jing. Kovis: Keypoint-based visual servoing with zero-shot sim-to-real transfer for robotics manipulation. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 7527–7533. IEEE, 2020. 2 [35] Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 4 [36] Sharath Chandra Raparthy, Eric Hambro, Robert Kirk, Mikael Henaff, and Roberta Raileanu. Generalization to new sequential decision making tasks with in-context learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03801 , 2023. 2 [37] Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Insup Lee. Regent: A retrieval-augmented generalist agent that can act in-context in new environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04759 , 2024. 2 [38] Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Insup Lee. Ricl: Adding in-context adaptability to pre-trained vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02062 , 2025. 2 [39] Chao Tang, Anxing Xiao, Yuhong Deng, Tianrun Hu, Wen-long Dong, Hanbo Zhang, David Hsu, and Hong Zhang. Functo: Function-centric one-shot imitation learning for tool manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11744 , 2025. 2 [40] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. 2 [41] Vitalis Vosylius and Edward Johns. Instant policy: In-context imitation learning via graph diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12633 , 2024. 2, 6 [42] Shengjie Wang, Jiacheng You, Yihang Hu, Jiongye Li, and Yang Gao. Skil: Semantic keypoint imitation learning for generalizable data-efficient manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14400 , 2025. 2, 6 [43] Yixuan Wang, Guang Yin, Binghao Huang, Tarik Keleste-mur, Jiuguang Wang, and Yunzhu Li. Gendp: 3d semantic fields for category-level generalizable diffusion policy. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2024. 2, 8 [44] Chuan Wen, Xingyu Lin, John So, Kai Chen, Qi Dou, Yang Gao, and Pieter Abbeel. Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learning, 2023. 2 [45] Mengda Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Yinghao Xu, Cheng Chi, Gor-don Wetzstein, Manuela Veloso, and Shuran Song. Flow as the cross-domain manipulation interface. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15208 , 2024. 2 [46] Zhengrong Xue, Shuying Deng, Zhenyang Chen, Yixuan Wang, Zhecheng Yuan, and Huazhe Xu. DemoGen: Syn-thetic demonstration generation for data-efficient visuomo-tor policy learning. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2025. 12 [47] Yida Yin, Zekai Wang, Yuvan Sharma, Dantong Niu, Trevor Darrell, and Roei Herzig. In-context learning enables robot action prediction in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12782 ,2024. 2 [48] Junyi Zhang, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Luisa Pola-nia Cabrera, Varun Jampani, Deqing Sun, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. A tale of two features: Stable diffusion complements dino for zero-shot semantic correspondence. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:45533–45547, 2023. 2, 5 [49] Xinyu Zhang and Abdeslam Boularias. One-shot imitation learning with invariance matching for robotic manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13178 , 2024. 2 [50] Yucheng Zhou, Xiang Li, Qianning Wang, and Jianbing Shen. Visual in-context learning for large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11574 , 2024. 2 [51] Yifeng Zhu, Arisrei Lim, Peter Stone, and Yuke Zhu. Vision-based manipulation from single human video with open-world object graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20321 ,2024. 2 6. M ATCHING DATASET Generation Details 

6.1. Dataset Organization 

MATCHING DATASET contains 15K task-consistent trajec-tory sets and over 150K trajectory realizations, involving more than 50K manipulated-object instances. Each set is initialized from one procedurally constructed reference demonstration. We organize the dataset as 

D = {S m}Mm=1 , Sm =

n

τ (n)

> m

oNm

> n=1

, (1) where D denotes the complete dataset, M is the number of task-consistent sets, and m indexes these sets. Sm is the set initialized from the m-th reference demonstration, Nm is its number of trajectory realizations, and τ (n) 

> m

denotes its n-th trajectory. Trajectories within Sm preserve the same task specifica-tion and object models while varying object poses, scene layouts, observations, and robot motions. Each trajectory contains synchronized RGB-D observations, point clouds, robot and gripper states, and end-effector actions, together with ground-truth 3D correspondence and visibility annota-tions. 

6.2. Reference Synthesis and Spatial Retargeting 

As shown in Fig. 6, we construct reference demonstra-tions using task-relevant object meshes sampled from ShapeNet [6]. Each demonstration is defined by an object-centric task specification describing the roles of the in-volved objects, their interaction regions, and the desired spatial relation or motion. These specifications instantiate common behaviors such as grasping, pick-and-place, push-ing or pulling, and opening or closing, as well as lower-frequency behaviors including insertion, rotation, pressing, stacking, hanging, and sorting. We convert each task specification into object-centric end-effector waypoints and corresponding gripper states, which are interpolated to produce a continuous trajectory. For prehensile interactions, the manipulated object main-tains a fixed relative transform to the gripper after grasping. The resulting motion is synthesized kinematically and ren-dered from the configured camera views to obtain synchro-nized observations and actions. Given a reference demonstration, M ATCHING ENGINE 

generates additional realizations through object-centric spa-tial retargeting. Similar object-centric retargeting principles are used in MimicGen [29] and DemoGen [46]. Specif-ically, we sample new poses for task-relevant objects and perturb the surrounding scene layout. Because each way-point is expressed in the coordinate frame of its associated object, it can be transformed together with the object while preserving the corresponding interaction region. For multi-object tasks, different trajectory segments may be anchored to different objects. For example, the grasp segment of a pick-and-place trajectory is anchored to the source object, whereas the placement segment is anchored to the target object. We transform each segment using its associated object pose and connect the resulting seg-ments through interpolated free-space motion. The refer-ence demonstration and its retargeted realizations jointly form one task-consistent set Sm.

6.3. Ground-Truth Correspondence Annotation 

All trajectories within a task-consistent set retain the same object meshes and local object coordinates. This shared ob-ject space allows canonical surface points to define corre-spondence identities across frames and trajectory realiza-tions. For clarity, we consider one task-relevant object and omit the set and object indices. We uniformly sample W = 2048 

canonical surface anchors {xj }Wj=1 from its mesh. The world-space position of anchor xj in frame t of trajectory n

is 

p(n) 

> j,t

= R(n) 

> t

xj + t(n) 

> t

, (2) where R(n) 

> t

and t(n) 

> t

denote the frame-wise object rotation and translation, respectively. Points transformed from the same canonical anchor xj therefore share an exact corre-spondence identity across frames and trajectories. Let P(n) 

> t

denote the observed point cloud in the same frame. We associate each transformed anchor with its near-est observed point: 

q(n) 

> j,t

= arg min 

> q∈P (n)
> t

q − p(n) 

> j,t 2

. (3) We mark the anchor as visible when 

q(n) 

> j,t

− p(n) 

> j,t 2

< r vis , (4) where rvis is the visibility tolerance. Because the point cloud is back-projected from the rendered depth observa-tion, occluded or out-of-view anchors do not have a suf-ficiently close observed point. For every frame, we store the canonical anchor identity, its associated observed point, and its visibility flag. This provides ground-truth cross-trajectory correspondence supervision without requiring a learned feature matcher during training. 

## 7. Real-world Experiment Details and Results 

Tasks and Success Criteria We design four real-world tasks ( Fig. 7) and define strict success criteria for each task: 

Pour Water: the teapot spout is positioned vertically above the cup and the teapot has been tilted by ≥ 15 ◦; Put Lid: 

the lid covers ≥ 60% of the pot’s opening; Open Box: the lid has been completely flipped open; Cut Egg: The knife has reached the top of the egg yolk and has then moved downward by at least 2cm .ShapeNet Random pick Dense correspondence  

> Random roll out

# ... pos 1 pos 2 pos N 

> task 1
> . . .
> task 2 task n

Figure 6. Data generation pipeline of MatchingDataset 

Figure 7. The real-world four tasks for evaluation. 

Figure 8. The diverse set of test objects 

Three-level Generalization We assess our models on a set of challenging everyday manipulation tasks, as shown in Fig. 7. The object variants are shown in Fig. 8. Layout-Easy: We randomize the scene by rotating all objects be-tween −30 ◦ and 30 ◦ and applying a random translational offset of 3–5 cm on the table plane; Layout-Hard: We apply more aggressive randomization, rotating objects be-tween 90 ◦ and 150 ◦ with the same 3–5 cm translational offset; Shape: We replace the demonstration objects with semantically similar counterparts that differ in appearance and geometry ( Fig. 8), and then randomize the scene ac-cording to the “Layout-Easy” setting. 

Inter-Category Generalization For example, given a demonstration of placing a lid onto a pot, our policy can successfully adapt to place a lid onto a novel teapot (See Fig. 9). 

Interaction Following To test the nuanced understand-ing of our policy, we provided two demonstrations of the 

Pour water task that differed only in the grasping style .Our model not only succeeded at the task but also precisely replicated the distinct interaction style from each demon-stration (See Fig. 10). Figure 9. Cross-Category Generalization 

Figure 10. Interaction following shown in the demonstrations.