Title: Adaptive Coarse-to-Fine Subgoal Refinement for Long-Horizon Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28127v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:53:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# ADAPTIVE COARSE -TO -F INE SUBGOAL REFINEMENT FOR 

# LONG -H ORIZON OFFLINE GOAL -C ONDITIONED 

# REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

Kaiqiang Ke 1,2 Shenghong He 1 Chengdong Xu 1,2 Yuheng Luo 1 Xiangyuan Lan 2 Chao Yu 11Sun Yat-sen University 

> 2

Pengcheng Laboratory 

{kekq,heshh23,xuchd6,luoyh227}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn lanxy@pcl.ac.cn yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn 

May 28, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) is challenging in long-horizon tasks, where distant state–goal pairs provide weak supervision and value estimates become vulnerable to accumu-lated bootstrapping errors. Hierarchical methods mitigate this difficulty by introducing intermediate subgoals, but fixed temporal abstractions or fixed hierarchy depths can be mismatched to state– goal pairs with different reachability horizons. We propose Coarse-to-Fine Hierarchical Goal Reinforcement Learning (CFHRL), a fully offline GCRL framework that adaptively refines dis-tant goals before execution. Starting from the final goal, CFHRL recursively proposes intermediate targets, trained from replay-supported candidates, and stops refinement once the current target is estimated to be locally executable by a learned reachability cost. The key idea is that a subgoal need not be an exact midpoint or globally optimal waypoint; it only needs to provide reliable progress and reduce the remaining reaching difficulty, enabling subsequent refinement over shorter horizons. A stylized analysis further supports the robustness of approximate recursive contraction. Experiments on OGBench show substantial gains on several long-horizon tasks, with ablations validating the proposed refinement and stopping mechanisms. 

# 1 Introduction 

Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) aims to learn policies that reach diverse goals from a fixed dataset of previously collected trajectories [Schaul et al., 2015, Andrychowicz et al., 2017, Eysenbach et al., 2022, Park et al., 2025a]. This setting is appealing for robotics and embodied-control problems, where online exploration may be expensive, unsafe, or impractical [Li et al., 2022, Giammarino et al., 2025]. However, offline GCRL becomes particularly challenging when the desired goal is far from the current state. This difficulty mainly arises from long-horizon value estimation: under sparse goal-reaching rewards, distant state–goal pairs provide little direct supervision, and the value function has to propagate goal information through many bootstrapped updates [Kostrikov et al., 2022, Park et al., 2026, Ni et al., 2026]. As the temporal distance increases, approximation errors can accumulate along the backup chain and lead to inaccurate evaluations of faraway goals [Sutton et al., 1999, Nachum et al., 2018, Mirowski et al., 2018, Park et al., 2023, Ahn et al., 2025]. Consequently, directly training a flat goal-conditioned policy from this value function can be unreliable, as the policy must make long-horizon decisions based on potentially inaccurate value estimates. Hierarchical decomposition provides a natural way to mitigate the long-horizon difficulty in offline GCRL. Rather than requiring a flat policy to directly reach a distant goal, hierarchical methods introduce intermediate subgoals so that long-horizon goal reaching can be reduced to a sequence of shorter-range decisions [Sutton et al., 1999, Nachum et al., 2018, Mirowski et al., 2018, Park et al., 2023, Ahn et al., 2025]. Existing methods typically instantiate this idea through 

> arXiv:2605.28127v1 [cs.LG] 27 May 2026

A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 s

> 𝑔
> ❌
> wrong action
> correct
> action
> value error
> (overestimated)
> s
> 𝑔
> too near
> wrong subgoal
> too far
> (unexecutable)
> s
> 𝑔

# Fixed hierarchy    

> ❌
> subgoal 𝑔 1
> 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑔 3
> subgoal 𝑔 2
> not optimal
> but useful

# Ours Flat policy 

Figure 1: Motivation of adaptive stopping-time coarse-to-fine refinement. A flat goal-conditioned policy directly depends on noisy long-horizon value estimates. A fixed hierarchy introduces subgoals but uses a prescribed temporal scale or a fixed number of high-level decisions, which can be mismatched to state-goal pairs with different reachability horizons. CFHRL instead refines the current planning target only when it is estimated to be outside the executable region of the low-level policy, and stops once the target becomes locally reachable. fixed temporal abstractions, trajectory-based subgoal extraction, or learned high-level subgoal policies [Chane-Sane et al., 2021, Park et al., 2023, Ahn et al., 2025]. Despite their effectiveness, these methods often rely on a prescribed decomposition scale, such as a fixed subgoal horizon or a fixed number of high-level decisions. Such a fixed scale can be mismatched to state–goal pairs with different reachability horizons: as shown in Figure 1, overly local subgoals may make only marginal progress toward the final goal, so their small value differences can be dominated by long-horizon estimation errors and lead to misleading subgoal choices; whereas overly distant subgoals may fall outside the reliable execution range of the low-level policy. This raises a natural question: can an offline hierarchical agent adaptively identify a suitable intermediate target for each state–goal pair? Our key idea is to solve long-horizon goal reaching in a coarse-to-fine manner. Although learned value functions can be noisy, coarse refinement does not require fine-grained discrimination among nearby states. At the initial stage, the candidate targets differ at a larger scale, so the value function only needs to provide a directional signal toward a replay-supported region that reduces the remaining reachability horizon. The selected subgoal there-fore need not be optimal; it only needs to make meaningful progress and enable subsequent, finer refinement over shorter and more reliable horizons. As illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1, this adaptive process converts a distant goal-reaching problem into a sequence of locally manageable subproblems. Motivated by this insight, we propose Coarse-to-Fine Hierarchical Goal Reinforcement Learning (CFHRL), a fully offline GCRL framework that adaptively refines distant goals before execution. Starting from the final goal, CFHRL recursively replaces the current planning target with intermediate targets produced by a planner trained on replay-supported candidates, until the target is estimated to be locally executable by a learned reachability cost. The refinement planner is trained from replay-supported candidates, using a reachability-based objective that favors inter-mediate targets which reduce the bottleneck cost between the current state and the original goal. After refinement, the selected target is executed through an abstraction policy and a low-level goal-conditioned policy, both trained by progress-weighted imitation over short-horizon offline segments. Overall, CFHRL uses a shared reachability signal to coordinate target selection, adaptive stopping, and local execution, allowing the effective decomposition depth to be determined by the estimated reachability of each state–goal pair in a fully offline manner. Our contributions are three-fold: (1) We formulate long-horizon offline GCRL as adaptive stopping-time subgoal refinement, where the effective decomposition depth is determined by learned executability rather than a fixed horizon. (2) We introduce a replay-supported contraction objective that trains an amortized refinement planner without test-time graph search. (3) We provide a stylized motivating analysis and empirical ablations illustrating when approximate contraction and adaptive stopping can improve long-horizon maze-style goal reaching. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

2.1 Offline Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning 

We consider an offline goal-conditioned Markov decision process M = ( S, A, G, P, r, γ, ρ 0), where S and A denote the state and action spaces, G denotes the goal space, P is the transition dynamics, γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor, 2A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 and ρ0 is the initial-state distribution. In this work, goals share the same representation space as states; we use s and g

only to distinguish the current state from the desired target. The objective is to learn a goal-conditioned policy π(a | s, g ) from a fixed offline dataset D = {τi}Ni=1 , where 

τi = ( si

> 0

, a i

> 0

, s i

> 1

, . . . , s iTi ), without further environment interaction. Following the standard sparse goal-reaching for-mulation, the reward is defined as 

r(st, a t, g ) = 

{0, if st+1 reaches g, 

−1, otherwise .

Thus, values are non-positive, and values closer to zero indicate shorter expected reaching time. The main difficulty in long-horizon offline GCRL is that supervision for distant goals must be propagated through many transitions using only fixed offline data. 

2.2 Goal-Conditioned Implicit Value Learning 

CFHRL uses a unified goal-conditioned value function as the reachability estimator. Following GCIVL [Park et al., 2025a], we learn a V -only goal-conditioned value function from hindsight-relabeled offline transitions. Let (s, s ′) ∼ D 

denote a state transition from the offline dataset, and let g ∼ pD

> mix

(· | s) be a relabeled goal sampled from a mixture of current, future, and random goals. The value function is trained by the expectile objective 

LGCIVL (ϕ) = E(s,s ′)∼D , g ∼pD

> mix (·| s)

[ℓτ

> 2

(rg (s) + γ ¯V (s′, g ) − Vϕ(s, g ))] , (1) where ¯V is the target value network, rg follows the sparse goal-reaching reward defined above, and ℓτ 

> 2

(u) = |τ −1{u < 

0}| u2 is the expectile regression loss. We convert the learned value into a non-negative reachability cost by 

Dϕ(s, g ) = 

[

−̂ Vϕ(s, g )

]

> +

, (2) where [x]+ = max( x, 0) . For a single value network, ̂ Vϕ = Vϕ; when an ensemble is used, we take the conservative estimate ̂ Vϕ(s, g ) = min m Vϕm (s, g ). Since sparse goal-reaching values are non-positive in the ideal case, this reduces to Dϕ(s, g ) = −Vϕ(s, g ) up to numerical clipping. Thus, smaller Dϕ(s, g ) indicates that g is estimated to be more reachable from s.

2.3 Midpoint-Based Subgoal Learning 

A common strategy for long-horizon goal reaching is to introduce an intermediate subgoal g′ between the current state 

s and final goal g [Jurgenson et al., 2020, Gong et al., 2024, Chane-Sane et al., 2021, Huang et al., 2024]. Given a reachability distance d, a midpoint-style objective evaluates a candidate subgoal by 

C(g′ | s, g ) = max {d(s, g ′), d (g′, g )}. (3) Minimizing this cost encourages g′ to balance the two subproblems s → g′ and g′ → g. This perspective is important but incomplete for heterogeneous horizons. A one-shot subgoal can still be too distant for local execution, and a fixed hierarchy depth may be insufficient as the state-goal distance grows. CFHRL extends the midpoint principle into a recursive procedure: it repeatedly selects value-guided contracting subgoals until the remaining target is estimated to be executable by the local controller. 

# 3 Method 

3.1 Overview 

CFHRL is an adaptive hierarchical framework for long-horizon offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. Given a current state s and a final goal g, CFHRL first refines the distant goal into a locally executable target, then converts this target into an execution-oriented command, and finally uses a low-level policy to produce primitive actions. The framework consists of three learned policies. The refinement planner πp(u | s, g ) proposes an intermediate target u in the same state–goal representation used by the reachability model, conditioned on the current state and the current planning target. The abstraction policy πz(z | s, ¯g) maps the refined target ¯g to a local command z. The low-level policy πa(a | s, z ) maps the command to a primitive action. These policies are coordinated by the shared reachability cost Dϕ(s, g ) in Eq. (2). The same cost is used for value-guided planner training, executability checking, and progress-weighted local imitation. 3A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

3.2 Adaptive Coarse-to-Fine Refinement 

CFHRL replaces a fixed subgoal scale with an adaptive refinement process. Given the current state s and the final goal g, the planner initializes the planning target as g(0) = g and progressively refines it into a more locally reachable target. At refinement level ℓ, the current target g(ℓ) is regarded as locally executable from s if 

Dϕ(s, g (ℓ)) ≤ ϵexec , (4) where ϵexec is the executability threshold. It specifies the maximum estimated reachability cost under which the target is directly passed to the execution policies. If Eq. (4) is satisfied, refinement stops and g(ℓ) is passed to the execution module. Otherwise, the planner proposes an intermediate target u(ℓ) ∼ πp(· | s, g (ℓ)), and the planning target is updated as 

g(ℓ+1) = u(ℓ).

This procedure is repeated until the target becomes locally executable or the maximum refinement depth Kmax is reached. The resulting stopping level is 

ℓ⋆(s, g ) = min 

{

ℓ ∈ { 0, . . . , K max } : Dϕ(s, g (ℓ)) ≤ ϵexec 

}

, (5) with ℓ⋆(s, g ) = Kmax if no target satisfies the stopping condition. The final refined target is then 

¯g = g(ℓ⋆(s,g )) . (6) Thus, the refinement depth is determined by estimated reachability rather than a fixed temporal scale [Ahn et al., 2025, Hwang et al., 2026, Park et al., 2025b]. Nearby goals can be executed directly, while distant goals are recursively replaced by intermediate targets. The planner need not predict an exact midpoint; it only needs to propose targets that reduce the remaining reaching difficulty. 

3.3 Offline Learning of the Refinement Planner 

The refinement planner is trained entirely from offline data. Given a current observation st and a high-level target g,we construct a replay-supported candidate set 

CD (st, g ) = {˜si}Nc

> i=1

, (7) where each ˜si is a full observation sampled from the offline dataset and used as a candidate target for planner supervi-sion [Eysenbach et al., 2019, Baek et al., 2025]. When g comes from the same trajectory as st, candidates are sampled from intermediate future states between st and g; otherwise, they are sampled from the replay state distribution. This construction keeps subgoal supervision close to the data support. Each candidate is scored by the bottleneck reachability cost of the two induced subproblems: 

Cϕ(˜ si | st, g ) = max {Dϕ(st, ˜si), D ϕ(˜ si, g )}. (8) Both terms query the same reachability model with full-observation state–target pairs. The first term estimates the cost of reaching the candidate observation ˜si from st, while the second estimates the remaining cost of reaching g from ˜si.A lower score indicates that the candidate better contracts the original reaching problem. We train the planner by value-guided weighted imitation. The candidate weights are defined as 

wi = exp ( −Cϕ(˜ si | st, g )/η p)

∑Nc 

> j=1

exp ( −Cϕ(˜ sj | st, g )/η p) , (9) where ηp is the planner temperature. The planner is optimized with 

Lp = −E(st,g, CD )

[ Nc∑

> i=1

sg( wi) log πp(˜ si | st, g )

]

. (10) Thus, the planner learns to imitate replay-supported subgoals that decompose a distant goal into easier residual reach-ing problems, without requiring online interaction or manually labeled subgoals. At inference time, the planner sam-ples directly from this learned policy; replay support is therefore imposed through offline supervision rather than by explicit nearest-neighbor projection or test-time replay-buffer search. 4A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

3.4 Learning the Execution Policies 

After refinement, CFHRL executes the selected target ¯g through the same abstraction interface as HIQL [Park et al., 2023]. The abstraction policy πz(z | s, ¯g) converts the refined target into a local command z, and the low-level policy 

πa(a | s, z ) maps this command to a primitive action. To train these policies, we sample short-horizon segments (st, a t, s t+h) from the offline dataset, where h lies within a local execution window. The future state st+h serves as the local target, and the corresponding command is constructed as zt = ψ(st, s t+h). Here ψ denotes the command-construction map used by the low-level actor. In the default setting, learned policy-side goal representations are disabled and zt is the raw local goal representation. When learned representations are enabled, ψ is the goal encoder trained with the value function and detached when used as an actor target. The abstraction policy learns to predict zt from (st, s t+h), while the low-level policy imitates the dataset action 

at conditioned on (st, z t).Both policies are trained by value-improvement-weighted behavior cloning [Ghosh et al., 2021, Ma et al., 2022, Zeng et al., 2025]. For the local target st+h, we define 

ωt = min {exp ( α [Vϕ(st+1 , s t+h) − Vϕ(st, s t+h)]) , ω max } . (11) The execution losses are 

Lz = −ED [ωt log πz(zt | st, s t+h)] , (12) 

La = −ED [ωt log πa(at | st, z t)] . (13) The weight ωt assigns larger imitation weight to transitions that increase the learned value toward the local target, thereby biasing both execution policies toward locally progressive behavior. At test time, CFHRL refines the final goal into ¯g, samples z ∼ πz(· | s, ¯g), and executes πa(· | s, z ) for a short interval before replanning. This enables adaptive execution without global replay-buffer search at inference time. The complete training and inference procedures are provided in Algorithms 1 and 2 in Appendix. 

# 4 A Motivating Analysis 

This section provides an illustrative analysis of why adaptive coarse-to-fine refinement can be more robust than fixed local-scale subgoal selection under noisy long-horizon distance estimates. The analysis is not intended as a general guarantee for arbitrary offline GCRL problems. Instead, it highlights a key intuition: fixed local-scale decisions can still be scored by noisy long-horizon residuals, whereas recursive refinement only requires approximate contraction of the remaining reaching problem. In CFHRL, the learned distance estimate ̂ D corresponds to the reachability cost 

Dϕ = −Vϕ.Let D⋆(s, g ) denote the true reachability distance and ̂ D(s, g ) its learned estimate. Consider a one-dimensional problem with current state s = 0 and a final goal g⋆ located at distance T > 0 from the current state, so that 

D⋆(x, g ⋆) = |T − x|. Assume the learned estimate satisfies ̂

D(x, g ⋆) = D⋆(x, g ⋆) + ξ(x, g ⋆), Var[ ξ(x, g ⋆)] = σ2(D⋆(x, g ⋆))2α, (14) for α ∈ (0 , 1] . Here, σ controls the overall magnitude of estimation noise, while α captures that distance estimates become noisier as the residual horizon increases. 

Proposition 4.1 (Fixed local-scale decisions can have vanishing signal-to-noise) . Suppose a fixed local-scale hierar-chy compares x+ = k and x− = −k, where 0 < k < T , x+ moves toward the goal, and x− moves away from it. Assume that the noise terms ξ(x+, g ⋆) and ξ(x−, g ⋆) are independent zero-mean Gaussian variables with variances specified by Eq. (14) . Then the probability of selecting the wrong candidate is 

Pfix (T ) = Φ 

(

− 2kσ√(T − k)2α + ( T + k)2α

)

, lim   

> T→∞

Pfix (T ) = 12 , (15) 

where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. 

Proposition 4.1 shows that choosing a fixed local subgoal scale does not necessarily remove the long-horizon estima-tion burden. Although the candidate step size is fixed, the compared residual distances remain of order T , while the useful decision margin is only O(k).5A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 We next analyze value-guided contraction. For a candidate subgoal x, define the true decomposition cost as 

C⋆(x | s, g ) = max {D⋆(s, x ), D ⋆(x, g )}. (16) For ρ ∈ (1 /2, 1) , define the ρ-contraction set 

Gρ(s, g ) = {x : C⋆(x | s, g ) ≤ ρD ⋆(s, g )}. (17) Any candidate in this set reduces the maximum residual horizon by a constant factor. 

Proposition 4.2 (Approximate contraction is sufficient) . Let T = D⋆(s, g ⋆) and suppose the candidate set X contains a good candidate xg satisfying C⋆(xg | s, g ⋆) ≤ ρ0T , where 1/2 ≤ ρ0 < ρ < 1. Let ̂

C(x | s, g ⋆) = max {̂D(s, x ),̂ D(x, g ⋆)}. (18) 

On the event 

Eε =

{

sup 

> x∈X

∣∣∣̂ C(x | s, g ⋆) − C⋆(x | s, g ⋆)

∣∣∣ ≤ εT 

}

, (19) 

if ε < (ρ − ρ0)/2, then any minimizer ̂ x = arg min x∈X ̂ C(x | s, g ⋆) belongs to Gρ(s, g ⋆).

Proposition 4.2 formalizes the weak requirement used by CFHRL: exact midpoint prediction is unnecessary. It is enough for the learned cost to preserve a coarse margin between candidates that contract the horizon and those that do not. The same argument also tolerates an approximate selector. If a learned planner selects ˜x such that ̂ C(˜ x | s, g ⋆) ≤

min x∈X ̂ C(x | s, g ⋆) + βT , then ˜x ∈ G ρ(s, g ⋆) whenever ε < (ρ − ρ0 − β)/2. Thus, the analysis characterizes the target behavior induced by value-guided planner training, rather than providing a finite-sample guarantee for the learned actor. If each refinement step selects a ρ-contraction, the residual horizon after L refinements satisfies TL ≤ ρLT0, so reaching a local executable radius r requires only O(log( T0/r )/ log(1 /ρ )) refinements. In practice, refinement can fail and local execution is imperfect. Let δρ(Tℓ) be the probability of failing to select a ρ-contraction at residual horizon Tℓ, and let ψ(T ) upper-bound local execution error for a target with residual horizon T . Conditioned on all L

refinement steps being successful, the remaining horizon is at most ρLT0. A union bound over refinement failures and final local execution gives 

Perr (L) ≤

> L−1

∑

> ℓ=0

δρ(Tℓ) + ψ(ρLT0). (20) The term δρ(Tℓ) summarizes all failures of the learned refinement step. In Appendix A.4, we further decompose this term into three concrete sources: insufficient replay coverage of contracting candidates, error in the learned reachability cost, and approximation error of the amortized planner. This extended analysis connects the contraction view to the offline candidate budget used in CFHRL, while keeping the main text focused on the motivating mechanism. 

# 5 Experiments 

We evaluate CFHRL on OGBench offline goal-conditioned control tasks [Park et al., 2025a]. Our experiments assess whether adaptive coarse-to-fine refinement improves long-horizon goal reaching, verify the contributions of adaptive stopping and reachability-guided subgoal selection, and study the effect of the offline candidate budget used for planner supervision. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Environments. We evaluate on OGBench locomotion and manipulation tasks. The locomotion suite includes Point-Maze, AntMaze, HumanoidMaze, and AntSoccer, where agents must reach target goals through continuous-control navigation. The manipulation suite includes Cube and Scene, where agents interact with movable objects to achieve specified goal configurations. Together, these tasks cover diverse offline goal-conditioned control problems across navigation and manipulation domains. 

Baselines. We compare with representative offline GCRL methods, including goal-conditioned behavior cloning (GCBC) [Ding et al., 2019], goal-conditioned implicit value learning (GCIVL) [Park et al., 2025a], goal-conditioned implicit Q-learning (GCIQL) [Park et al., 2025a], quasimetric reinforcement learning (QRL) [Wang et al., 2023], con-trastive reinforcement learning (CRL) [Eysenbach et al., 2022], and hierarchical implicit Q-learning (HIQL) [Ghosh et al., 2021, Eysenbach et al., 2022, Park et al., 2023, Myers et al., 2025]. HIQL is the most direct hierarchical baseline, as it also derives a hierarchical policy from a learned goal-conditioned value function. We further evaluate controlled variants of CFHRL in Section 5.3. Unless otherwise stated, all baseline results use the official OGBench hyperparameters and tuning protocol. 6A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 Table 1: Main results on OGBench locomotion and manipulation tasks. We report mean success rate and standard deviation over 8 random seeds. Best results in each row are shown in bold. The aggregate score is computed over the tasks shown in the table.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

> Environment Dataset GCBC GCIVL GCIQL QRL CRL HIQL CFHRL
> PointMaze pointmaze-giant-navigate-v0 1±20±00±068 ±727 ±10 46 ±982 ±11
> pointmaze-giant-stitch-v0 0±00±00±050 ±80±00±057 ±8
> AntMaze antmaze-giant-navigate-v0 0±00±00±014 ±316 ±365 ±568 ±4
> antmaze-giant-stitch-v0 0±00±00±00±00±02±20±0
> HumanoidMaze humanoidmaze-giant-navigate-v0 0±00±00±01±03±212 ±442 ±6
> humanoidmaze-giant-stitch-v0 0±00±00±00±00±00±00±0
> AntSoccer antsoccer-arena-navigate-v0 5±147 ±350 ±28±223 ±258 ±258 ±3
> antsoccer-medium-navigate-v0 2±04±17±12±23±113 ±216 ±2
> Cube cube-single-play-v0 6±253 ±468 ±65±119 ±215 ±323 ±2
> cube-double-play-v0 1±136 ±340 ±51±010 ±26±24±2
> Scene scene-play-v0 5±142 ±451 ±45±119 ±238 ±362 ±5
> Aggregate score 1.816 .519 .614 .010 .923 .237 .5

Evaluation protocol. Each method is trained with 8 random seeds and evaluated on 50 episodes per task and seed. We report mean success rates and standard deviations across seeds. All methods use the same offline datasets and standard OGBench goal configurations. The aggregate score is the unweighted average over the tasks reported in Table 1. 

5.2 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the main results on OGBench locomotion and manipulation tasks. Across the reported tasks, CFHRL achieves the highest aggregate score, improving over HIQL from 23 .2 to 37 .5. The improvement is mainly concen-trated in long-horizon maze-style tasks, where the agent must compose multiple locally feasible transitions to reach a distant goal. A representative example is PointMaze-Giant-Stitch, where CFHRL improves the success rate from 0 ± 0

to 57 ± 8. This task is particularly challenging for flat or fixed-hierarchy methods because the target often cannot be reached through a single reliable value-guided decision. By recursively refining the goal and stopping once the target becomes locally executable, CFHRL reduces the burden on both long-horizon value estimation and low-level control. The comparison with HIQL further suggests that the key advantage is not merely the use of hierarchy, but the ability to adapt the effective refinement depth to each state-goal pair. Fixed two-level abstraction can be mismatched when the selected subgoal is either too distant for the low-level policy or too conservative to make meaningful progress. In contrast, CFHRL uses the learned reachability cost to decide whether additional refinement is needed. This mechanism is especially useful in PointMaze and HumanoidMaze, where different start-goal pairs can have substantially different effective horizons even within the same environment. Qualitative planning visualizations in Appendix E show that the learned planner first selects coarse intermediate targets and then progressively refines them into more local execution targets as the agent replans. The results also reveal clear limitations of the proposed decomposition assumption. On Cube tasks, flat value-based methods such as GCIQL outperform CFHRL, suggesting that these tasks are less naturally captured by replay-supported waypoint-like decomposition and are more sensitive to precise contact dynamics and object-state changes. The strong performance on Scene-Play, however, indicates that adaptive refinement can still help manipulation-like domains when the task contains substantial repositioning or long-horizon goal decomposition. 

5.3 Controlled Ablations 

Table 2 evaluates the main design choices of CFHRL on representative long-horizon locomotion tasks. All variants use the same value-learning backend, so the comparison isolates the effect of refinement and execution design. First, the fixed-depth variants show that simply adding more forced refinement steps is not sufficient. In these variants, the planner performs exactly K refinement steps without the adaptive stopping rule. The one-step variant improves over HIQL on PointMaze-Giant, but forcing the planner to refine for K = 2 or K = 3 substantially degrades perfor-mance. This indicates that excessive refinement can accumulate planner errors or produce targets that are no longer suitable for local execution. These results suggest that the benefit of CFHRL does not come from simply increasing 7A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 Table 2: Controlled ablations isolating the main design choices of CFHRL. We report success rates on representative long-horizon locomotion tasks. Variant PointMaze-Giant HumanoidMaze-Giant AntSoccer-Medium Flat GCIVL 0 ± 0 0 ± 0 4 ± 1

CFHRL w/o planner 46 ± 9 12 ± 4 13 ± 2

Fixed depth K = 1 69 ± 8 9 ± 4 16 ± 2

Fixed depth K = 2 37 ± 1 2 ± 1 0 ± 0

Fixed depth K = 3 17 ± 4 0 ± 0 0 ± 0

CFHRL w/o abstraction policy 35 ± 7 16 ± 5 8 ± 2

CFHRL w/ random dataset subgoals 0 ± 0 0 ± 0 0 ± 0

CFHRL full 82 ± 11 42 ± 6 16 ± 2

Table 3: Effect of the training candidate budget Nc on performance and training throughput. The throughput is measured as the number of gradient updates per second on the same hardware. Larger Nc provides stronger value-guided supervision for the planner but increases training cost. 

Nc PointMaze-Giant HumanoidMaze-Giant Updates / sec. ↑ Mean refinement calls 

1 58 12 225 3.84 74 35 201 2.18 79 39 172 1.816 82 42 119 1.632 79 39 70 1.7

the number of high-level decisions. In contrast, full CFHRL uses a maximum refinement depth together with value-thresholded stopping, so the actual number of refinement steps can be smaller than the maximum depth when the current target is already estimated to be locally executable. Second, the random-subgoal variant fails on all tasks, confirming that the improvement does not come from condition-ing the policy on arbitrary intermediate states. The subgoals must be selected according to the learned reachability cost so that they contract the remaining goal-reaching problem. Removing the abstraction policy also reduces performance, showing that the refined target should be converted into an execution-oriented local command before being passed to the low-level controller. Additional sensitivity analyses on the maximum planning steps and the stopping threshold ϵ are provided in Ap-pendix D. 

5.4 Training Candidate Count 

Table 3 studies the effect of the training candidate budget Nc used for value-guided planner supervision. Increasing Nc

gives the planner access to a larger replay-supported candidate set, but also reduces training throughput because more candidate subgoals must be evaluated by the reachability model. Here, mean refinement calls denotes the average number of planner refinement calls during evaluation. The results show a clear trade-off. Small candidate sets provide weak supervision and lead to lower performance, especially on HumanoidMaze-Giant. Increasing Nc from 1 to 16 improves success rates and reduces the number of refinement calls, indicating that the planner learns to propose more useful intermediate targets. Further increasing Nc

to 32 does not improve performance and substantially lowers the number of gradient updates per second. We therefore use Nc = 16 as the default training candidate budget in the main experiments. 

# 6 Related Work 

Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning learns policies that can reach goals specified at test time [Schaul et al., 2015, Andrychowicz et al., 2017]. In offline GCRL, the agent learns from a fixed dataset and must generalize to new state-goal pairs without additional interaction [Park et al., 2025a]. Goal-conditioned behavior cloning provides a simple baseline [Lynch et al., 2020, Ghosh et al., 2021], while value-based methods such as GCIVL and GCIQL adapt implicit value learning to goal-reaching tasks [Kostrikov et al., 2022, Park et al., 2023, 2025a]. Representation-based approaches such as contrastive RL and quasimetric RL learn 8A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 structured goal-reaching similarities or distances [Eysenbach et al., 2022, Myers et al., 2025]. These methods are strong baselines, but distant goals remain challenging because flat value propagation must bridge long temporal gaps directly. 

Hierarchical and subgoal-based reinforcement learning. Hierarchical reinforcement learning uses temporal ab-straction to solve long-horizon tasks through options, high-level controllers, or learned subgoals [Sutton et al., 1999, Nachum et al., 2018, Mirowski et al., 2018]. Subgoal-based GCRL learns intermediate targets that decompose diffi-cult state-goal problems into shorter sub-problems [Jurgenson et al., 2020, Chane-Sane et al., 2021, Gong et al., 2024]. HIQL extracts a two-level hierarchical policy from a single goal-conditioned value function [Park et al., 2023], while recent methods study option-aware temporally abstracted values and chain-of-goals policies [Ahn et al., 2025, Choi et al., 2026]. These approaches demonstrate the value of hierarchy, but they often rely on a fixed temporal abstrac-tion or one-shot subgoal prediction. CFHRL differs by recursively refining goals and using a learned executability threshold to adapt the effective planning depth to each state-goal pair. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We proposed CFHRL, an adaptive hierarchical offline GCRL framework for long-horizon goal reaching. CFHRL recursively refines distant goals into more local targets and stops once the target is estimated to be executable. Experi-ments on OGBench show strong gains on maze-style long-horizon tasks, and ablations validate the roles of recursive refinement, adaptive stopping, and reachability-guided candidate selection. The weaker results on contact-rich manip-ulation suggest that future work should combine adaptive planning with richer object-centric abstractions. 

# References 

Hongjoon Ahn, Heewoong Choi, Jisu Han, and Taesup Moon. Option-aware temporally abstracted value for offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, pages 99833–99861. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2025/file/90080022263cddafddd4a0726f1fb186-Paper-Conference.pdf .Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. Seungho Baek, Taegeon Park, Jongchan Park, Seungjun Oh, and Yusung Kim. Graph-assisted stitching for offline hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with imagined sub-goals. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1430–1440. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/chane-sane21a.html .Jinwoo Choi, Sang-Hyun Lee, and Seung-Woo Seo. Chain-of-goals hierarchical policy for long-horizon offline goal-conditioned rl, 2026. Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-conditioned imitation learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , volume 32, 2019. Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging planning and reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Contrastive learning as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. Dibya Ghosh, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Justin Fu, Coline Devin, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. Oral Presentation. Vittorio Giammarino, Ruiqi Ni, and Ahmed H. Qureshi. Physics-informed value learner for offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Xudong Gong, Dawei Feng, Kele Xu, Bo Ding, and Huaimin Wang. Goal-conditioned on-policy reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 45975–46001, 2024. Zixuan Huang, Yating Lin, Fan Yang, and Dmitry Berenson. Subgoal diffuser: Coarse-to-fine subgoal generation to guide model predictive control for robot manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2024. 9A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 Jaebak Hwang, Sanghyeon Lee, Jeongmo Kim, and Seungyul Han. Strict subgoal execution: Reliable long-horizon planning in hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. Tom Jurgenson, Or Avner, Edward Groshev, and Aviv Tamar. Sub-goal trees a framework for goal-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Jinning Li, Chen Tang, Masayoshi Tomizuka, and Wei Zhan. Hierarchical planning through goal-conditioned offline reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(4):10216–10223, 2022. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2022. 3190100. Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura, editors, Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning , volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1113–1132. PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020. Jason Yecheng Ma, Jason Yan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learn-ing via f -advantage regression. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 310–323. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. Piotr Mirowski, Matt Grimes, Mateusz Malinowski, Karl Moritz Hermann, Keith Anderson, Denis Teplyashin, Karen Simonyan, koray kavukcuoglu, Andrew Zisserman, and Raia Hadsell. Learning to navigate in cities without a map. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018. Vivek Myers, Bill Zheng, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with quasimetric representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2018. Tianwei Ni, Esther Derman, Vineet Jain, Vincent Taboga, Siamak Ravanbakhsh, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. Long-horizon model-based offline reinforcement learning without conservatism. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2026. Seohong Park, Dibya Ghosh, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Offline goal-conditioned rl with latent states as actions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Seohong Park, Kevin Frans, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Ogbench: Benchmarking offline goal-conditioned rl. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025a. Seohong Park, Aditya Oberai, Pranav Atreya, and Sergey Levine. Transitive rl: Value learning via divide and conquer. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. Taegeon Park, Seungho Baek, Jongchan Park, Seungjun Oh, and Yusung Kim. Temporal distance-aware subgoal generation for offline hierarchical reinforcement learning. In ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , 2025b. Tom Schaul, Dan Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2015. Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. In Artificial Intelligence , 1999. Tongzhou Wang, Antonio Torralba, Phillip Isola, and Amy Zhang. Optimal goal-reaching reinforcement learning via quasimetric learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 36411–36430. PMLR, 2023. Xianghua Zeng, Hao Peng, Angsheng Li, and Yicheng Pan. Structural information-based hierarchical diffusion for offline reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. 10 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

# A Proofs 

This appendix provides the proofs for the stylized analysis in Section 4. The analysis is intended to isolate the mech-anism behind adaptive coarse-to-fine refinement. It studies an idealized value-guided selector that chooses candidates according to an estimated decomposition cost. In the implemented algorithm, this selector is approximated by a learned high-level actor trained from offline candidate subgoals. Therefore, the results should be interpreted as mechanism-level justification rather than a finite-sample guarantee for the learned policy. 

A.1 Proof of Proposition 4.1 

We compare two fixed local-scale candidates in the one-dimensional problem. The current state is s = 0 , and the final goal g⋆ is located at coordinate T > 0. Let x+ = k denote the candidate that moves toward the goal and x− = −k

denote the candidate that moves away from the goal, where 0 < k < T . The true residual distances to the final goal are 

D⋆(x+, g ⋆) = T − k, D⋆(x−, g ⋆) = T + k. 

Thus, the true margin between the incorrect and correct candidates is 2k.The learned distance estimate is ̂

D(x, g ⋆) = D⋆(x, g ⋆) + ξ(x, g ⋆),

where the noise variance scales with the residual horizon as 

Var[ ξ(x, g ⋆)] = σ2(D⋆(x, g ⋆))2α.

The fixed local-scale selector makes an error when the estimated distance of the correct candidate is larger than that of the incorrect one: ̂

D(x+, g ⋆) >̂ D(x−, g ⋆).

Substituting the noisy estimates gives 

(T − k) + ξ(x+, g ⋆) > (T + k) + ξ(x−, g ⋆),

or equivalently, 

ξ(x+, g ⋆) − ξ(x−, g ⋆) > 2k. 

By assumption, ξ(x+, g ⋆) and ξ(x−, g ⋆) are independent zero-mean Gaussian variables. Therefore, the difference 

ξ(x+, g ⋆) − ξ(x−, g ⋆) is Gaussian with mean zero and variance 

σ2 [(T − k)2α + ( T + k)2α] .

It follows that the error probability is 

Pfix (T ) = Φ 

(

− 2kσ√(T − k)2α + ( T + k)2α

)

,

where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. For any α > 0, the denominator diverges as T → ∞ ,and hence the argument of Φ converges to zero. Consequently, 

lim   

> T→∞

Pfix (T ) = 12 .

A.2 Proof of Proposition 4.2 

Let T = D⋆(s, g ⋆) be the current residual horizon. Suppose the candidate set X contains a good candidate xg

satisfying 

C⋆(xg | s, g ⋆) ≤ ρ0T, 

where 1/2 ≤ ρ0 < ρ < 1. On the event Eε, the estimated decomposition cost satisfies 

∣∣∣̂ C(x | s, g ⋆) − C⋆(x | s, g ⋆)

∣∣∣ ≤ εT 

for all x ∈ X .By the error bound, the estimated cost of xg is bounded by ̂

C(xg | s, g ⋆) ≤ C⋆(xg | s, g ⋆) + εT ≤ (ρ0 + ε)T. 

11 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 Let ̂ x be a minimizer of the estimated decomposition cost over X . Then ̂

C(̂ x | s, g ⋆) ≤̂ C(xg | s, g ⋆) ≤ (ρ0 + ε)T. 

Applying the error bound again yields 

C⋆(̂ x | s, g ⋆) ≤̂ C(̂ x | s, g ⋆) + εT ≤ (ρ0 + 2 ε)T. 

If ε < (ρ − ρ0)/2, then ρ0 + 2 ε < ρ . Therefore, 

C⋆(̂ x | s, g ⋆) < ρT, 

which implies ̂

x ∈ G ρ(s, g ⋆).

Approximate selector. The same argument applies when the selector is approximate. Suppose the learned planner selects ˜x ∈ X such that ̂

C(˜ x | s, g ⋆) ≤ min 

> x∈X

̂ C(x | s, g ⋆) + βT. 

Since xg ∈ X , we have ̂

C(˜ x | s, g ⋆) ≤̂ C(xg | s, g ⋆) + βT ≤ (ρ0 + ε + β)T. 

Using the uniform error bound once more gives 

C⋆(˜ x | s, g ⋆) ≤̂ C(˜ x | s, g ⋆) + εT ≤ (ρ0 + β + 2 ε)T. 

Thus, if ε < (ρ − ρ0 − β)/2, then C⋆(˜ x | s, g ⋆) < ρT , and therefore 

˜x ∈ G ρ(s, g ⋆).

A.3 From Approximate Contraction to Adaptive Stopping 

Let T0 denote the initial residual horizon. If each refinement step selects a ρ-contraction, then the residual horizon after L refinement steps satisfies 

TL ≤ ρLT0.

Therefore, to reduce the residual horizon below a local execution radius r, it is sufficient to choose 

L ≥ log( T0/r )log(1 /ρ ) .

In practice, refinement is learned from finite offline data, so a contraction may fail. Let δρ(Tℓ) denote the probability that refinement step ℓ fails to select a ρ-contraction at residual horizon Tℓ. Let ψ(T ) upper-bound the local execution error for a target with residual horizon T .Conditioned on all L refinement steps selecting ρ-contractions, the remaining horizon is at most ρLT0, so the final local execution error is at most ψ(ρLT0). The event that the overall procedure fails is contained in the union of the events that at least one refinement step fails and the event that local execution fails after successful refinement. Therefore, a union bound gives 

Perr (L) ≤

> L−1

∑

> ℓ=0

δρ(Tℓ) + ψ(ρLT0).

This expression captures the refinement trade-off: increasing L can reduce the local execution difficulty, but it also introduces more opportunities for planning errors. This motivates the value-thresholded stopping rule used by CFHRL: refine while the target is too distant, and stop once the selected target is estimated to be locally executable. 

A.4 Dataset Coverage and Amortized Planner Approximation 

The analysis in the main text assumes that the candidate set contains a contracting subgoal and that the selector approximately minimizes the estimated decomposition cost. We now make these two requirements explicit. For a state–goal pair (s, g ) with T = D⋆(s, g ), define the dataset contraction mass 

qρ0 (s, g ) = Pr 

> x∼μD

[C⋆(x | s, g ) ≤ ρ0T ] ,

12 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 where μD denotes the replay-state distribution. This quantity measures how much probability mass the offline dataset assigns to useful intermediate states. If Nc candidates are sampled independently from μD , then the probability that at least one ρ0-contracting candidate appears is 

pcov (s, g ) = 1 − (1 − qρ0 (s, g )) Nc .

Thus, increasing the candidate budget improves the chance of observing a replay-supported contracting subgoal, but only when such subgoals have non-negligible dataset support. 

Proposition A.1. Let T = D⋆(s, g ) and suppose Nc candidates are sampled independently from the replay-state distribution μD . Assume that the value-induced decomposition cost satisfies 

sup 

> x∈X

∣∣∣̂ C(x | s, g ) − C⋆(x | s, g )

∣∣∣ ≤ ϵT 

with probability at least 1 − δV . Assume further that the learned planner selects a candidate ˜x ∈ X satisfying ̂

C(˜ x | s, g ) ≤ min 

> x∈X

̂ C(x | s, g ) + βT 

with probability at least 1 − δπ . If ρ0 + β + 2 ϵ < ρ , then 

Pr [˜ x ∈ G ρ(s, g )] ≥ 1 − (1 − qρ0 (s, g )) Nc − δV − δπ .

Proof. Let X be the sampled candidate set. By definition of qρ0 (s, g ), the probability that X contains at least one candidate xg satisfying 

C⋆(xg | s, g ) ≤ ρ0T

is 

1 − (1 − qρ0 (s, g )) Nc .

On this coverage event and on the value-accuracy event, we have ̂

C(xg | s, g ) ≤ C⋆(xg | s, g ) + ϵT ≤ (ρ0 + ϵ)T. 

If the planner is βT -approximate with respect to the estimated cost, then ̂

C(˜ x | s, g ) ≤̂ C(xg | s, g ) + βT ≤ (ρ0 + ϵ + β)T. 

Applying the value-accuracy bound once more gives 

C⋆(˜ x | s, g ) ≤̂ C(˜ x | s, g ) + ϵT ≤ (ρ0 + β + 2 ϵ)T. 

Since ρ0 + β + 2 ϵ < ρ , we obtain 

C⋆(˜ x | s, g ) < ρT, 

which implies ˜x ∈ Gρ(s, g ). The stated probability follows by a union bound over the failure of candidate coverage, value accuracy, and planner approximation. This proposition separates three sources of refinement failure. The first term corresponds to insufficient replay cover-age: the sampled candidate set may not contain any useful intermediate state. The second term corresponds to error in the learned reachability cost, which may misorder candidates. The third term corresponds to amortized planner error, since the learned planner may not exactly minimize the estimated decomposition cost. 

# B Implementation Details 

B.1 Reachability Score 

We convert the learned value into a non-negative reachability cost by 

Dϕ(s, g ) = 

[

−̂ Vϕ(s, g )

]

> +

, (21) where [x]+ = max( x, 0) . For a single value network, ̂ Vϕ(s, g ) = Vϕ(s, g ). When using an ensemble, we use the conservative estimate ̂ Vϕ(s, g ) = min m Vϕm (s, g ). Since sparse goal-reaching values are non-positive in the ideal case, Eq. (21) reduces to Dϕ(s, g ) = −Vϕ(s, g ), while the clipping only prevents numerical approximation errors from producing negative reachability costs. 13 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

B.2 Actor Interfaces 

CFHRL uses three actor modules with different roles. The high-level actor πp receives the current observation and the current planning target, and outputs a target in the same state–goal representation used by the reachability model. The abstraction actor πz receives the current observation and the refined high-level target, and outputs the command consumed by the low-level actor. The low-level actor πa receives the current observation and this command, and outputs a primitive action. When learned goal representations are disabled, the abstraction actor outputs a goal vector with the same dimension-ality as the achieved-goal space. When learned representations are enabled, the abstraction actor outputs a vector in the learned representation space. The sampled representation is renormalized before being passed to the low-level actor, matching the representation scale used during training. In the default setting used for the reported experiments, Policy-side learned goal representations are disabled and the mid-level abstraction policy is enabled. All actor losses are implemented as negative log-likelihood losses under diagonal Gaussian policies with constant standard deviations, following the actor interface used by HIQL-style offline GCRL. 

B.3 Offline Candidate Construction 

The refinement planner is trained using candidate subgoals drawn from the offline dataset. For each high-level training tuple, we sample Nc replay-supported candidate subgoals from the offline dataset. Each candidate ˜si is a full dataset observation and is directly used as a candidate target for the planner. The decomposition cost is computed as 

Cϕ(˜ si | st, g ) = max {Dϕ(st, ˜si), D ϕ(˜ si, g )}.

Thus, both legs of the decomposition are evaluated by querying the value function with full-observation state-goal pairs. This design keeps planner supervision on the support of the offline dataset and avoids introducing an additional goal-representation interface for candidate construction. 

B.4 Training Target Sampling 

The implementation uses different goal-sampling schemes for value learning, low-level actor learning, and high-level planner learning. For value learning, goals are sampled from current, future trajectory, and random goals with prob-abilities 0.2, 0.5, and 0.3, respectively. For low-level actor learning, actor goals are sampled from future trajectory goals using a fixed-step local-goal sampling strategy. For high-level planner learning, goals are sampled from future trajectory goals and random goals with probabilities 0.8 and 0.2, respectively. For each high-level training tuple, the planner uses Nc = 16 replay-supported candidate subgoals. This value is used consistently across all reported experiments unless otherwise specified. 

B.5 Training of the Goal Representation 

We clarify how the goal representation ψω is used and trained in CFHRL. In the reachability/value estimator, the value function is implemented as 

Vθ,ω (s, g ) = ¯Vθ

(s, ψ ω (s, g )),

where ψω is a learned goal encoder. Therefore, ψω is trained jointly with the reachability/value estimator through the value loss. We do not introduce an additional auxiliary representation learning objective for ψω .Importantly, ψω is not updated by the planner, abstraction-policy, or low-level policy losses. Whenever ψω is used to construct targets for these components, the output of ψω is detached from the computation graph. For example, the abstraction-policy target is 

zt = sg [ ψω (st, s t+h)] ,

where sg[ ·] denotes the stop-gradient operator. The abstraction policy is then trained to imitate this detached target using the same weighted negative log-likelihood form as in Eq. (13): 

Labs = −E [ωt log πz (sg[ ψω (st, s t+h)] | st, g )] .

In our implementation, πz is a diagonal Gaussian actor with a constant standard deviation; thus this loss is equivalent to a weighted squared-error regression up to constants. Gradients from the abstraction-policy loss update only πz , not 

ψω .14 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

Algorithm 1 CFHRL Training 

Require: Offline dataset D; value network Vϕ; policies πp, π z, π a; candidate count Nc. 

> 1:

repeat  

> 2:

Sample transitions and hindsight goals from D. 

> 3:

Update Vϕ using LGCIVL . 

> 4:

Sample high-level tuples (st, g ) from D. 

> 5:

Construct replay-supported candidate observations CD (st, g ) = {˜si}Nc

> i=1

. 

> 6:

Compute Cϕ(˜ si | st, g ) = max {Dϕ(st, ˜si), D ϕ(˜ si, g )}. 

> 7:

Compute planner weights wi by Eq. (9).  

> 8:

Update πp by weighted imitation of candidate observations ˜si. 

> 9:

Sample local segments (st, a t, s t+1 , s t+h) from D and construct zt = ψ(st, s t+h). 

> 10:

Update πz and πa using Lz and La. 

> 11:

until convergence 

Algorithm 2 CFHRL Inference 

Require: Trained Dϕ, π p, π z, π a; current state s; final goal g; maximum depth Kmax ; threshold ϵ; execution interval 

Hexec . 

> 1:

while the episode has not terminated and the final goal has not been reached do  

> 2:

g(0) ← g 

> 3:

for ℓ = 0 , 1, . . . , K max − 1 do  

> 4:

if Dϕ(s, g (ℓ)) ≤ ϵ then  

> 5:

τ ← ℓ 

> 6:

break  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

Sample u(ℓ) ∼ πp(· | s, g (ℓ)) 

> 9:

g(ℓ+1) ← u(ℓ) 

> 10:

τ ← ℓ + 1  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

¯g ← g(τ ) 

> 13:

for j = 1 , 2, . . . , H exec do  

> 14:

Sample z ∼ πz(· | s, ¯g) 

> 15:

Sample a ∼ πa(· | s, z ) 

> 16:

Execute a, observe s′, and set s ← s′ 

> 17:

if the final goal is reached then  

> 18:

break  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

end while B.6 Inference Schedule 

At test time, CFHRL repeatedly refines the final goal into a local target and executes the low-level policy for a short interval before replanning. The high-level planner performs at most Kmax refinement steps. At each step, the planner samples one subgoal conditioned on the current state and the current planning target. If the current target satisfies 

Dϕ(s, g ) ≤ ϵ, refinement stops and the target is passed to the execution module. Otherwise, the proposed subgoal becomes the next planning target. If no target satisfies the reachability threshold within the refinement budget, the last proposed target is used. The resulting target is passed to the abstraction policy, which produces a local command for the low-level policy. The low-level policy is executed for at most Hexec environment steps before replanning. This schedule keeps the planner adaptive while avoiding expensive test-time search. 

# C Hyperparameters 

Table 5 lists the default hyperparameters used in CFHRL. Unless otherwise stated, these hyperparameters are shared across the reported experiments. 15 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 Table 4: Environment-specific hyperparameters used by CFHRL. All values are fixed before final evaluation and are not tuned separately on test tasks. Environment family ϵexec Discount γ Kmax Hexec 

PointMaze-Giant 100 0.995 3 25 AntMaze-Giant 100 0.995 3 25 HumanoidMaze-Giant 100 0.995 3 100 Cube 50 0.99 1 10 Scene 50 0.99 1 10 AntSoccer 50 0.99 1 25 Table 5: Default hyperparameters for CFHRL. Hyperparameter Value Value-learning backend GCIVL Value ensemble size 2Discount γ 0.995 Expectile τ 0.9 Optimizer Adam Learning rate 3 × 10 −4

Batch size 256 Target update rate 0.005 Actor hidden dimensions (512 , 512 , 512) 

Value hidden dimensions (512 , 512 , 512) 

Layer normalization Yes Constant actor standard deviation Yes Use abstraction policy Yes Use learned goal representation No Low-level actor temperature αa 10.0 Abstraction actor temperature αz 10.0 Advantage weight clip ωmax 100.0 Planner temperature ηp 1.0 Training candidate count Nc 16 Maximum refinement depth Kmax 3Executability threshold ϵexec 100 Execution interval Hexec 25 Value loss weight λV 1.0 Planner loss weight λp 1.0 Abstraction loss weight λz 1.0 Low-level actor loss weight λa 1.0 Gradient clipping Disabled 

Baseline tuning. We use the official OGBench evaluation protocol and official hyperparameter configurations for all baselines whenever available. Baselines are evaluated on the same datasets, goal sampling protocol, episode horizons, and number of random seeds as CFHRL. We do not perform additional per-task tuning for baselines beyond the official OGBench settings. 

Fixed-depth ablations. The fixed-depth variants are designed to isolate the contribution of adaptive stopping. They therefore use the same learned reachability cost Dϕ, planner architecture, abstraction policy, low-level policy, replay data, optimizer, batch size, training steps, and all other hyperparameters as CFHRL. The only change is that the recursive refinement procedure is forced to run for a fixed depth K, rather than terminating when Dϕ(s, g ) ≤ ϵexec .

Environment-specific hyperparameters. We report the executability threshold and discount factor used by CFHRL in Table 4. The executability threshold ϵexec is used in the adaptive stopping criterion Dϕ(s, g ) ≤ ϵexec , and γ is the discount factor used for training the reachability/value estimator. Unless otherwise specified, all other hyperparameters are shared across environments and are listed in Table 5. 16 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

Figure 2: Effect of the maximum number of planning steps on PointMaze-Giant and HumanoidMaze-Giant. Moderate refinement depth improves performance, while excessive refinement can reduce success due to accumulated planning errors or overly local targets. 

# D Additional Ablation Studies 

This section provides additional sensitivity analyses for two important inference-time hyperparameters in CFHRL: the maximum number of planning steps and the stopping threshold ϵ used in the reachability-based refinement rule. These experiments complement the controlled ablations in Section 5.3 and further examine how refinement depth and local reachability criteria affect performance. 

D.1 Effect of Planning Steps 

Figure 2 studies the effect of the maximum number of planning steps. On PointMaze-Giant, performance improves when the planner is allowed to refine the target for a small number of steps, with the best result obtained around two planning steps. On HumanoidMaze-Giant, the benefit of additional planning is more gradual, and the best perfor-mance is achieved with three to four planning steps. These results indicate that refinement is useful for long-horizon tasks, but the benefit is not monotonic with planning depth. Too few planning steps may leave the target outside the reliable execution range, while too many steps can introduce additional planner errors or produce overly conservative intermediate targets. 

D.2 Effect of the Executability Threshold 

Figure 3 evaluates the sensitivity to the stopping threshold ϵ in the reachability-based refinement rule. A smaller threshold imposes a stricter executability criterion and therefore encourages more refinement before execution. Alarger threshold makes the agent stop refinement earlier, but may pass a target to the execution policy before it is reliably reachable. On PointMaze-Giant, an intermediate threshold achieves the best performance, suggesting that the target should be refined enough to become executable while still preserving meaningful progress. On HumanoidMaze-Giant, performance is better with a more conservative threshold, indicating that complex dynamics benefit from more local execution targets. Overall, the results show that the appropriate stopping criterion is environment-dependent, supporting the need for reachability-based adaptive refinement. 

# E Planning Visualization 

Figure 4 provides qualitative examples of the learned refinement behavior in representative maze episodes. At each replanning step, CFHRL starts from the final goal and recursively proposes intermediate targets until the selected target is estimated to be executable by the local policy. The visualization shows that the planner first chooses relatively coarse targets when the final goal is far away, and then produces more local targets as the agent moves closer to the goal. This behavior is consistent with the intended coarse-to-fine mechanism: intermediate targets are not required to be globally optimal waypoints, but should provide reliable progress and reduce the remaining reaching difficulty. 17 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 

Figure 3: Effect of the stopping threshold ϵ on PointMaze-Giant and HumanoidMaze-Giant. The threshold controls when refinement terminates: smaller values require the selected target to be more locally reachable, while larger values stop refinement earlier. task1: step 0 task1: step 178 task1: step 356 task1: step 534 task3: step 0 task3: step 166 task3: step 332 task3: step 498 

Figure 4: Visualization of learned coarse-to-fine planning in two representative maze episodes. Each panel corre-sponds to a replanning step. The blue marker S is the current state, the yellow star g is the final goal, and h1, h 2, h 3

are intermediate refinement targets connected by the dashed white line. The orange square H is the final refined target passed to execution, while the green diamond M is the local command target produced by the abstraction policy. The orange arrow indicates the resulting local execution direction. As the agent moves and replans, the selected targets become progressively more local. 

# F Limitations 

CFHRL has several limitations. First, its performance depends on the quality and calibration of the learned reachability cost Dϕ. If the value function is severely miscalibrated on off-dataset or contact-rich states, the planner may select poor subgoals. Second, the current abstraction command is a simple local goal representation in environment-specific goal-relevant coordinates. This is effective for navigation but can be insufficient for manipulation tasks requiring precise contact sequences. Third, recursive refinement increases inference-time computation through repeated planner, value, abstraction-policy, and low-level-policy calls, although no replay-buffer candidate enumeration is performed at test time. Finally, the stylized analysis is illustrative and does not constitute a general theorem for high-dimensional offline RL. Developing stronger guarantees under realistic value approximation and dataset-coverage assumptions is an important direction for future work. 

Generality across value-learning backends. Although our implementation uses GCIVL as the default value-learning backend, CFHRL is designed as a backend-agnostic framework. The planner training objective, the adaptive stopping rule, and the local execution weights all rely on a generic reachability cost Dϕ(s, g ), rather than on algorithm-18 A PREPRINT - M AY 28, 2026 specific properties of GCIVL. As a result, the same coarse-to-fine refinement principle can potentially be instantiated with other offline GCRL value or distance estimators, including GCIQL, quasimetric representations, contrastive goal-conditioned representations, or conservative value estimators. The present paper focuses on validating the refinement mechanism with one stable value backend. A broader evaluation across different reachability estimators is an important direction for future work, and would further demonstrate the generality of the proposed framework. 19