Title: DISC: Decoupling Instruction from State-Conditioned Control via Policy Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.20856v1

Published Time: Thu, 21 May 2026 01:01:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# DISC: Decoupling Instruction from State-Conditioned Control via Policy Generation 

Hanxiang Ren ‡,§,¶,* Pei Zhou §,¶,* Xunzhe Zhou §,¶ Yanchao Yang §,¶,† 

> ‡

Zhejiang University §The University of Hong Kong ¶TranscEngram 

Abstract —Language-conditioned manipulation policies typi-cally process instructions and observations through shared network parameters. This task-state entanglement provides apathway for observation leakage – networks learn scene-to-action shortcuts that bypass language grounding entirely. DISC elimi-nates this failure structurally. Rather than conditioning a univer-sal policy on language, DISC uses a hypernetwork to generate the 

entire parameter set of a task-specific visuomotor policy from the instruction alone. The generated policy never directly accesses language; therefore, its task-awareness must come from the language. Consequently, observation leakage has no pathway to emerge. On the other hand, generating coherent high-dimensional policy weights is itself a challenging problem. We address it with a two-stage hypernetwork whose refinement stage embeds the structure of gradient-based optimization as a feed-forward inductive bias, producing globally consistent parameters without actual gradient computation. Trained entirely from scratch on standard data budgets, DISC outperforms all entangled baselines on LIBERO-90 and Meta-World, with advantages that widen on complex, long-horizon tasks – and surpasses the large-scale pretrained π0 despite using no external pretraining data. On a real-world benchmark where all tasks share identical visual context, DISC substantially outperforms entangled alternatives, directly confirming that language-generated policy parameters, not visual shortcuts, drive behavior. The hypernetwork further learns a semantically structured parameter manifold that enables few-shot adaptation from minimal demonstrations and robust generalization across paraphrased instructions. Our code is available at: https://github.com/ReNginx/DISC. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Reliable task-conditioned manipulation requires robots to treat the task specification as the source of task identity, rather than as a weak hint that can be overridden by familiar visual scenes. Language-conditioned manipulation policies must pro-cess two fundamentally different inputs: an instruction that specifies what task to perform (fixed throughout an episode) and an observation that captures what the current state is 

(evolving continuously). Current architectures conflate these roles by processing both through shared representations – a design we term task-state entanglement . We argue this cre-ates two compounding failures. First, shared parameters face optimization tension between language grounding (requiring semantic understanding) and visuomotor control (requiring spatial precision). Second, and more critically, entangled ar-chitectures enable observation leakage : visual context often correlates with task identity in limited robotics datasets, al-lowing the network to map scenes directly to actions while 

> *

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. 

bypassing language entirely. For example, in a shared kitchen scene, a policy may learn the frequent pan-placement behavior and omit the instructed stove-activation subgoal. The result is policies that exploit visual shortcuts rather than ground instructions – succeeding on familiar scenes but failing when instructions change or visual context becomes ambiguous. Ev-idence from the broader vision-language community confirms this pattern, manifesting as modality competition [22, 40], visual neglect [24], and entity grounding failures [1, 25]. We propose DISC , which takes architectural decoupling to its logical conclusion: a task specification, instantiated here as language, generates the entire parameter set of a task-specific visuomotor policy. A hypernetwork processes instructions alone to produce policy weights; the generated policy processes visual observations alone using those weights. This separation provides a structural guarantee against ob-servation leakage – no task-agnostic parameters exist where shortcuts could emerge, and task semantics influence behav-ior only through generated weights. A central challenge is that naive weight generation produces incoherent parameters. 

DISC addresses this with a two-stage architecture. A Weight Initialization Network first maps the language embedding to a semantically informed point in parameter space. An Iterative Refinement Module then improves this initialization by mimicking the structure of gradient-based optimization – forward evaluation, error estimation, and parameter correction – while remaining fully feed-forward at inference time. This optimization-inspired inductive bias enables the hypernetwork to produce globally coherent policy parameters without incur-ring the cost of actual gradient computation, bridging the gap between the expressiveness of full policy generation and the quality demands of precise visuomotor control. Despite training entirely from scratch, DISC achieves 94.3% on LIBERO-90 and 92.2% on Meta-World, outperforming the strongest trained-from-scratch entangled baseline by 7.7% on LIBERO-90. For context, DISC surpasses even the pretrained 

π0 (91.6%) and remains competitive with π0.5 (95.7%) – demonstrating that architectural inductive biases can recover much of the benefit attributed to large-scale pretraining. The advantage widens on complex, long-horizon tasks, precisely where task-state entanglement is most damaging. On a real-world combinatorial benchmark where visual context is shared across all 9 tasks, DISC achieves 86.4% versus 78.5% for the best entangled baseline, confirming that task-specific generated parameters, not visual shortcuts, drive behavior. The decou-

> arXiv:2605.20856v1 [cs.RO] 20 May 2026

pled architecture further enables superior few-shot adaptation, robust grounding across paraphrased instructions, and a se-mantically structured parameter manifold where related tasks cluster closely by functional meaning. II. R ELATED WORK 

Multi-Task Manipulation Policies. Current language-conditioned manipulation methods process instructions and observations through shared network components and dif-fer mainly in their fusion mechanism. Transformer-based approaches [5, 17, 45, 49, 46] tokenize and concatenate multimodal inputs into unified sequences [42], as exempli-fied by RT-1 [4], Gato [30], Octo [41], VQ-BeT [37], and BAKU [10] – where the same WQ, WK , WV projections and feed-forward weights operate on both language and visual tokens. Text-aware variants such as OTTER [13] condition visual features on language, but retain shared action-prediction parameters. Concept-guided policies such as AutoCGP [47] learn semantic control structure from unlabeled demonstra-tions. Diffusion-based methods [11, 39] instead cast control as conditional denoising, pioneered by Diffusion Policy [6]. Architectures have evolved from U-Nets [35] with FiLM conditioning [27] to Transformer-based backbones such as DiT [26] and BESO [32], with RDT-1B [21] and MoDE [33] scaling through pre-training and mixture-of-experts tuning, while DP3 [44], 3D Diffuser Actor [16], and PointVLA [18] enhance geometric grounding via 3D representations. Flow-matching models π0 [3] and π0.5 [15] further improve general-ization through large-scale pre-training. Despite this diversity, all these methods entangle instruction and state within shared processing stages. Concatenation-based transformers apply identical weights to both modalities throughout the network. Cross-attention and FiLM-based architectures [27] introduce partial separation – FiLM affects vision only through affine modulation – but language still controls only a small fraction of computation, while the vast majority of parameters remain task-agnostic and can learn shortcut mappings that bypass language entirely. As analyzed in Section III-A, this task-state entanglement creates two problems: optimization tension between competing functions within shared parameters, and observation leakage that enables the network to map visual context directly to actions without grounding language. 

Hypernetworks for Policy Generation. An alternative paradigm uses hypernetworks [2, 9, 14, 48] – networks trained to output the weights of another – to generate task-specific policies. HyPoGen [31], HyperZero [34], and Hyper-GoalNet [48] demonstrate this for multi-task or goal-conditioned manipulation. These methods motivate separating task specification from policy execution, but differ in condi-tioning and generator design: HyPoGen and HyperZero use compact MLP-style generators, while Hyper-GoalNet condi-tions on goal images and current observations rather than language-only specifications. DISC addresses both the frame-work question – decoupling instruction from state-conditioned control by generating task-specific target policy parameters from language – and the architecture question, introducing an optimization-inspired hypernetwork whose iterative refine-ment enables feed-forward generation of high-quality policy parameters. Although adaptable to meta-learning [8, 36, 38], we focus on multi-task manipulation policy learning. III. P RELIMINARY 

We target multi-task robotic manipulation, where an agent must execute diverse tasks specified by natural language in-structions. Each task is defined by an instruction l ∈ J , and at each timestep, the agent receives an observation ot = ( It, s t)

comprising an RGB image and proprioceptive state, from which it produces a continuous action at ∈ A .Notably, the instruction and observation serve qualitatively different roles. The instruction specifies what task to perform 

– it defines the goal and remains fixed throughout an episode. The observation captures what the current state is – it evolves continuously and directly constrains which action is appropri-ate. A well-designed policy shall treat these inputs according to their distinct roles, without conflating the two. For learning, given a dataset D of expert demonstrations spanning N tasks, we train a policy via behavior cloning: 

LBC (θ) = E(ot,a t,l )∼D 

∥π(ot, l ; θ) − at∥22

 . (1) Current approaches learn an entangled policy π(o, l ; θ) that processes both inputs through shared parameters – a design we term task-state entanglement . As we argue next, this ar-chitectural choice introduces fundamental learning difficulties that compromise language grounding. 

A. Limitations of Task-State Entanglement 

Task-state entanglement creates two distinct problems that undermine robust instruction following. 

a) Problem 1: Competing Functions within Shared Pa-rameters: A language-conditioned policy must serve two dis-tinct roles: interpreting the instruction to understand what task to perform, and processing observations to predict appropriate actions. In entangled architectures, both roles are handled by the same parameters. For instance, transformer-based policies concatenate language and visual tokens: Output = Transformer (Concat (Tl, T v ); θ) ; (2) Diffusion policies similarly condition on jointly embeddings: 

at = Denoise (ϵt | el, e v ; θ) . (3) In both designs, shared parameters θ must simultaneously learn language understanding and visuomotor control. However, de-mands conflict: language understanding benefits from semantic abstraction and visual invariance, while visuomotor control requires sensitivity to precise spatial details. Thus, forcing both roles through shared parameters creates optimization tension that degrades either core function. Fig. 1: Behavioral Evidence of Task-State Entanglement. Current policies trained with entangled architectures fail to ground language instructions faithfully. Left: given the instruction regarding “white bowl,” Octo instead approaches the microwave – executing a behavior associated with a different task that shares similar visual context. Right: given the multi-step instruction “turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it,” the large-scale pretrained π0.5 skips the stove-activation subgoal and directly places the pan on the stove, matching a related pan-placement task under the same scene-level context. These failures illustrate observation leakage: the policies have learned scene-to-action mappings rather than instruction-to-action mappings. DISC , with its decoupled architecture, correctly executes both instructions by separating task specification from state-conditioned control. 

b) Problem 2: Observation Leakage Enables Shortcut Learning: A more severe failure arises from what we call 

observation leakage : visual observations often contain cues correlating with task identity. Specific objects, scene layouts, or robot configurations may appear predominantly in certain tasks. Given this, entangled architectures can learn to map visual patterns directly to actions – bypassing language. This shortcut minimizes training loss without requiring the network to ground linguistic meaning, yielding policies that succeed on familiar scenes but fail when instructions change. Figure 1 demonstrates this failure. In the left example, Octo approaches the microwave when asked to put the white bowl to the right of the plate, executing a behavior linked to a similar visual context. In the right example, the pretrained π0.5 is asked to turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it, but it performs only the pan-placement subgoal, consistent with a scene-level shortcut from the related task of putting the pan on the stove under the same scene context. These examples show that observation leakage can persist across model scales when language and state are fused during action fine-tuning. In contrast, our decoupled architecture executes the specified subgoals, confirming that architectural separation prevents such shortcuts. These problems compound to produce policies that are brittle to instruction variation, fail to generalize across visual contexts, and degrade on long-horizon tasks where grounding errors accumulate. To overcome these limitations, we propose treating language not as an input to be fused, but as a generative signal that produces the parameters of a task-specific visuomotor policy – an approach we detail next. IV. M ETHOD 

A. Decoupling Instruction from State-Conditioned Control 

Our solution is to separate task-specification processing from state-conditioned control entirely. In this paper, the task specification is instantiated as a natural-language instruction. Rather than learning a single policy that fuses both modalities, our method, DISC , decomposes the problem into two stages: (1) a hypernetwork Hϕ processes the task specification to generate a complete set of policy weights, and (2) the gener-ated policy πθπ maps observations to actions using only those weights – without any direct task-specification input. Formally, given an instruction l as the task specification, we first obtain a task embedding via a frozen language encoder: 

el = Φ L(l) . (4) The hypernetwork then generates policy parameters: 

θπ = Hϕ(el) . (5) Further, the generated policy performs visuomotor control: 

at = π(ot; θπ ) . (6) This decomposition directly addresses both problems iden-tified in Section III-A. First, the competing functions are as-signed to separate networks: the hypernetwork learns to inter-pret the task specification, while the target policy learns to map observation embeddings to actions, eliminating optimization tension between task understanding and visuomotor control. 

Second, the direct action-mapping pathway for observation leakage is structurally removed. In entangled architectures, shortcuts arise because the model can learn to ignore the task specification and map observations directly to actions – both modalities feed into the same network, so bypassing one is easy. In DISC , the target policy has no direct access to the instruction at all. The only way for task information to influence behavior is through the generated parameters; the hypernetwork must encode task semantics into the weights because there is no alternative route. Figure 2 illustrates this architecture. Observations ot enter only at the target policy stage, maintaining complete separation from task-specification processing. Fig. 2: The DISC architecture. The task specification, instantiated as a language instruction l, is encoded into embedding el

and processed by the hypernetwork through two stages: (1) the Weight Initialization Network generates initial parameters θ(0) 

> π

(labeled as θ(0) ), and (2) the learned iterative refinement module updates parameters over T steps to produce final θ(T ). The refinement module mimics optimization structure – forward, backward, and meta-update operations – but all transformations are learned, and the entire generation process is feed-forward. The generated parameters configure the target policy πθπ , a compact, task-specific visuomotor controller. Observations ot enter only at the target policy stage: the task specification determines which 

policy executes, while the generated policy processes visual input independently, ensuring complete separation between task-specification processing and state-conditioned control. 

a) Contrast with Conditioning Approaches: Existing conditioning methods – concatenation [37, 41], cross-attention [19], and FiLM [6, 27] – integrate language and vision within shared processing stages, to different extents. 

Concatenation exhibits the most direct form of entangle-ment: language tokens Tl and visual tokens Tv are concate-nated into a unified sequence and processed by the same transformer layers. Cross-attention uses modality-specific pro-jections to compute queries from vision and keys/values from language. While these projections are separate, the attention operation produces fused features that are processed by sub-sequent shared layers, entangling the two modalities from that point onward. FiLM is closest in spirit to our approach: language affects vision through learned affine modulation (γ(el)·hv +β(el)), and no layer processes both modalities with shared parameters. However, language generates only a small fraction of the computation – the scale and shift values – while the vast majority of the visual backbone parameters remain shared across all tasks. These shared, task-agnostic parameters can still learn shortcut mappings from visual features to actions that bypass language conditioning entirely. 

DISC takes this principle to its logical conclusion: all task-specific parameters of the target policy are generated from the task specification, instantiated here as a language instruction, leaving no space in the target policy where shortcuts could emerge. The policy’s entire computational structure is deter-mined by the task specification, ensuring that task semantics are embedded throughout the visuomotor controller rather than applied as a light modulation. 

B. Hypernetwork Architecture 

A core challenge is generating coherent, high-performing policy parameters from a task embedding induced by a lan-guage instruction. Naive direct regression from el to the full parameter vector θπ fails because policy networks contain millions of interdependent parameters with complex functional relationships. Prior hypernetwork architectures (e.g., simple MLP generators) struggle to capture these dependencies, pro-ducing weights that lack the coherent structure required for effective control. Our key architectural contribution is a hypernetwork that incorporates the structural inductive bias of iterative opti-mization while remaining fully feed-forward at inference time .The design is inspired by a simple observation: gradient-based optimization naturally produces coherent parameters via incre-mental updates respecting inter-layer dependencies. We embed this structure into the architecture itself – the hypernetwork 

mimics the computational pattern of optimization (forward pass, backward pass, parameter update), but how each of these operations refines the parameters is entirely learned from data. This achieves the coherence benefits of optimization-like refinement without incurring the computational cost of actual gradient computation at inference time. 

a) Stage 1: Weight Initialization Network: The first stage generates a coarse initialization from the task embedding: 

θ(0)  

> π

= WIN ϕ1 (el) . (7) This positions the parameters in a well-conditioned region of the weight space – distinguishing, for instance, grasping tasks from pushing tasks – but lacks the fine-grained precision required for successful execution. 

b) Stage 2: Learned Iterative Refinement: The second stage refines this initialization through T learned update steps: 

θ(t+1)  

> π

= θ(t) 

> π

+ ∆ θ(t), where ∆θ(t) = fϕ2 (θ(t) 

> π

, e l) . (8) Importantly, this is not optimization in the traditional sense. The refinement module fϕ2 is a neural network with fixed, learned parameters ϕ2. At inference time, generating policy parameters requires only T forward passes through fϕ2 – no gradients are computed with respect to any loss, no demon-stration data is accessed, and no iterative solving occurs. The entire generation process is feed-forward. Specifically, the refinement module is architecturally de-composed to mirror the structure of optimization: it computes a latent forward representation z from the current parameters, es-timates pseudo-gradient signals ∇z, and aggregates these into parameter updates ∆θ(t) (see Figure 2). However, unlike true optimization where gradients are computed analytically from a loss function, here the “forward,” “backward,” and “update” operations are all learned neural network components. The architecture provides the structural scaffold – the pattern of how information flows – while training determines the actual transformation at each stage. This learned refinement process produces globally coherent parameter updates, similar to how true gradients enforce consistency across layers, but adapted specifically to the encountered task distribution. 

c) Target Policy: The generated parameters θπ configure a compact visuomotor controller mapping observations to ac-tions. Because the target policy is specialized to a single task, it can be significantly smaller than monolithic architectures that must accommodate the entire task distribution within one set of weights. In our implementation, the target policy is a lightweight MLP, enabling efficient inference suitable for high-frequency robotic control. More architectural details are provided in the appendix. 

d) Training and Inference: The full framework is trained end-to-end by optimizing hypernetwork parameters ϕ =

{ϕ1, ϕ 2} using the behavior cloning loss: 

LBC (ϕ) = E(ot,a t,l )∼D 

∥π(ot; Hϕ(Φ L(l))) − at∥22

 . (9) For each training sample, the hypernetwork generates policy parameters θπ = θ(T ) 

> π

from the task specification, the tar-get policy uses these parameters to predict actions, and the prediction error backpropagates through the entire generation process to update ϕ accordingly. At inference time, deploy-ment is straightforward: given a new instruction l as the task specification, we encode it, run the hypernetwork forward to generate θπ , and execute the target policy in the environment. The generation is a single feed-forward pass through the hypernetwork for each task, after which the compact target policy runs independently at control frequency without further overhead during execution. 

C. Few-Shot Adaptation (Optional) 

We call this adaptation optional because it is not required by the standard inference pipeline; it is used only when a novel task is accompanied by a few demonstrations. A practical benefit of DISC ’s decoupled architecture is efficient adaptation to novel tasks from minimal demonstrations. The separation between the hypernetwork (which captures general knowledge about how language maps to policy structure) and the target policy (which executes a specific task) provides a natural decomposition for efficient adaptation. When presented with a novel task with instruction lnew and a small number of demonstrations Dnew = {ξj }Kj=1 , adaptation proceeds in two stages. First, the hypernetwork generates by mapping the new instruction to policy parameters: 

θinit  

> π

= Hϕ(Φ L(lnew )) . (10) Since the hypernetwork has learned the structure of the task manifold during multi-task training, this initialization already encodes relevant task semantics – positioning the parameters near the task-optimal region rather than at a random starting point. Second, the generated target policy parameters are fine-tuned with the provided demonstrations: 

θ∗ 

> π

= arg min 

> θπ

X 

> ξj∈D new

X

> (ot,a t)∼ξj

∥π(ot; θπ ) − at∥22 . (11) The hypernetwork remains frozen throughout, preserving its learned meta-knowledge. This transforms adaptation from a global search over a large, entangled parameter space into a local refinement of a compact, well-initialized policy – requiring fewer demonstrations and fewer gradient steps to reach competent performance. V. E XPERIMENT 

We conduct experiments to validate that explicit decou-pling of instruction processing from state-conditioned control through DISC improves language-conditioned robotic manip-ulation. Our evaluation addresses four key research questions: 1) Multi-Task Efficiency (RQ1): Does DISC ’s decoupled architecture outperform state-of-the-art entangled methods on diverse manipulation tasks? 2) Few-Shot Adaptation (RQ2): Can the structured parame-ter manifold learned by DISC enable more effective adapta-tion to novel tasks compared to entangled representations? 3) Language Grounding Quality (RQ3): Does DISC ’s de-coupled architecture ground the semantic content of in-structions – responding to task meaning rather than surface-level phrasing – and does the generated parameter space reflect meaningful task structure? 4) Real-World Deployment (RQ4): Does DISC ’s decoupling principle transfer to physical robot settings, where real-world perception noise and scene ambiguity might affect precise language-driven control? The experimental setup is detailed in Section V-A. We report multi-task performance in Section V-B, few-shot adaptation in Section V-C, language grounding and structure analysis in Section V-D, and real-world evaluation in Section V-E. Further implementation details are provided in the appendix. 

A. Experimental Setup a) Benchmarks: In simulation, we employ two standard benchmarks to test multi-task proficiency: LIBERO-90 [20] and Meta-World [43]. For LIBERO-90, we train on 90 diverse language-conditioned tasks and evaluate under novel initial configurations. To analyze performance relative to task complexity, we categorize these tasks into Easy , Medium ,and Long-Horizon groups based on the number of object interactions involved. For Meta-World, we adopt the ML45 protocol (45 goal-conditioned tasks) and group them by ma-nipulation primitives (e.g., pick&place , press&pull ) to assess semantic generalization across diverse mechanics. We utilize the standard dataset budget: 50 human demonstrations per task for LIBERO-90 and 100 expert demonstrations per task for Meta-World. Detailed task lists and categorization criteria are provided in the appendix. 

Real-World Benchmark. To rigorously evaluate whether language instructions – rather than visual cues – drive policy behavior, we construct a real-world testbed comprising 9distinct combinatorial tasks. Figure 3 illustrates this experi-mental protocol. The setup involves picking one of 3 potential target objects and placing it into one of 3 specific containers, resulting in 3 × 3 = 9 unique language-conditioned tasks. As depicted in Figure 3 (a), the workspace is cluttered with distractors. The yellow arrows exemplify the task ambiguity that is resolved solely by language: for instance, the Red Apple corresponds to three distinct potential trajectories depending on the target container specified in the instruction. Figure 3 (b) shows the terminal state of a successful execution. Cru-cially, because the same objects and containers are present in every task, visual context alone cannot determine the correct behavior – making this benchmark a direct test of whether observation leakage drives the policy. We collect 100 demonstrations for each task. Additional environment details are deferred to the appendix. 

b) Baselines: We benchmark DISC against a suite of state-of-the-art methods, categorized into two groups: (1) En-tangled Architectures , including Transformer-based models such as Octo [41] and VQ-BeT [37], the text-aware VLA model OTTER [13], and Diffusion-based models like U-Net-based Diffusion Policy (DP) [6] and Transformer-based Diffusion (DiT) [6]; and (2) Hypernetwork-based Archi-tectures , specifically HyPoGen [31] (abbreviated as H-Gen) and HyperZero [34] (H-Zero). To isolate the impact of archi-tectural inductive biases, we train all baselines from scratch using identical visual (ResNet-18) and language (T5-small) backbones. Architectural details are provided in the appendix. Furthermore, to contextualize our performance against the current state-of-the-art, we include two large-scale pretrained models, π0 [3] and π0.5 [15], fine-tuned on LIBERO-90 as reference points. 

c) Training Protocol: All experiments follow a standard Behavior Cloning (BC) paradigm. The aggregate training datasets consist of 4,500 episodes for LIBERO ( 50 ×90 ), 4,500 for Meta-World ( 100 × 45 ), and 900 for the real-world bench-mark ( 100 × 9). Crucially, to isolate the impact of proposed architecture from capacity-related benefits, we standardize the model size across all trained-from-scratch methods to ∼30M parameters. For the reference models π0 and π0.5, we fine-tune from their official pretrained checkpoints. Complete training details are available in the appendix. 

B. Multi-Task Performance (RQ1) 

We evaluate whether decoupling instruction from state-conditioned control improves multi-task performance. Models TABLE I: Multi-task performance on LIBERO-90. Success rates (%) averaged over 20 episodes. DISC shows increasing advantages on complex tasks where task-state entanglement is most problematic. Best in bold , second-best underlined among methods trained from scratch. Italicized values denote fine-tuned results with large-scale pretraining.                                               

> Method Easy Medium Long Overall Octo 92.3 89.0 79.3 84.7 VQ-BeT 89.5 86.7 84.3 85.9 DP 93.2 72.7 72.7 75.2 DiT 57.3 42.0 34.2 40.1 H-Zero 50.0 75.1 69.1 69.1 H-Gen 30.5 50.7 46.3 46.1 OTTER 96.4 87.9 83.2 86.6 DISC (Ours) 97.3 95.3 92.7 94.3
> π0(Pretrained + FT) 95.9 92.0 90.2 91.6
> π0.5(Pretrained + FT) 96.4 97.0 94.4 95.7

are tested on the same tasks in the training set, but with novel initial configurations (unseen object positions, robot poses) to assess whether the policy generalizes based on language instructions rather than memorized scene-action associations. 

a) Results on LIBERO-90: Table I reveals a critical pat-tern supporting our hypothesis. Among trained-from-scratch entangled baselines, OTTER [13] is the strongest overall, reaching 86.6%, and performs particularly well on Easy tasks with 96.4%. DISC achieves 94.3% overall – a 7.7% absolute improvement over OTTER. When checking the gap against the best from each category, we see it correlate with task complexity: +0.9% on Easy tasks (97.3 vs. 96.4), +6.3% on Medium tasks (95.3 vs. 89.0), and +8.4% on Long-Horizon tasks (92.7 vs. 84.3). This pattern is consistent with our analysis of task-state entanglement: as task horizon grows, the opportunity for observation leakage increases – entangled policies accumulate grounding errors across sequential steps because visual shortcuts that work for early subgoals may not generalize to later ones. DISC ’s decoupled architecture avoids this failure mode entirely, as the target policy has no mechanism to bypass its generated parameters. Remarkably, despite being trained entirely from scratch, DISC surpasses the large-scale pretrained model π0 (91.6%) and remains competitive with π0.5 (95.7%). 

b) Complementary Failure Modes vs. π0.5: A task-level comparison across all 90 LIBERO tasks reveals that DISC 

and π0.5 exhibit complementary failure modes despite their close aggregate gap: 68 tasks are within 5%, DISC wins by >5% on 9 tasks, and π0.5 wins by >5% on 13 tasks. 

DISC ’s largest advantages appear on multi-step tasks re-quiring precise language-grounded sequencing : on “turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it” across two kitchen scenes, DISC achieves 92%/96% while π0.5 drops to 30%/60% ( +62% /+36% gaps), suggesting π0.5 exploits scene-level visual priors rather than faithfully following the instruction. This indicates that even internet-scale pretraining does not eliminate observation leakage: action fine-tuning on Fig. 3: Real-World Combinatorial Benchmark Visualization. (a) Initial State: The setup presents inherent visual ambiguity: the target object (e.g., Red Apple) has multiple potential destinations (indicated by arrows). (b) Language-Conditioned Outcomes: Starting from the identical initial state shown in (a), DISC successfully executes three distinct tasks specified by different language instructions: (b1) placing the apple into the Small Gray Bowl , (b2) the Large Red Bowl , and (b3) the Light Gray Box . Because the visual scene is identical in all three cases, the divergent behaviors can only arise from the language instruction – confirming that the generated policy parameters, not visual context, determine task execution. TABLE II: Joint evaluation on LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Object, and LIBERO-Goal. Success rates (%) are averaged over 50 episodes per task. π0 and π0.5 are fine-tuned from pretrained checkpoints, whereas DISC is trained from scratch.                 

> Method Spatial Object Goal Overall
> π096.8 98.8 95.8 97.1
> π0.598.8 98.2 98.0 98.3
> DISC 99.2 99.4 97.4 98.7

limited robot data re-introduces shortcut-learning pathways through the entangled fusion of language and visual tokens. Conversely, π0.5’s largest advantages appear on fine-grained placement tasks (e.g., “place book in front compartment”), where DISC scores 46–56% vs. π0.5’s 75–95%. Since DISC 

achieves 96–100% on other book-placement tasks (left/back compartments), the gap reflects motor precision of the compact MLP target policy for specific spatial targets, rather than a language-grounding failure. 

c) Broader LIBERO Suite Evaluation: We further test whether DISC remains competitive on the standard LIBERO-Spatial, LIBERO-Object, and LIBERO-Goal suites under a broader joint-training setting. As shown in Table II, DISC 

achieves the highest overall success rate of 98.7%, slightly exceeding both pretrained reference models despite using no large-scale pretraining. DISC performs best on LIBERO-Spatial (99.2%) and LIBERO-Object (99.4%), while π0.5

obtains the highest score on LIBERO-Goal (98.0%). These results provide an additional cross-suite check that the de-coupled architecture remains competitive beyond LIBERO-90, rather than being tailored to a single benchmark split. 

d) Results on Meta-World: Meta-World results (Ta-ble III) confirm that DISC ’s advantages generalize across benchmarks. While simple open&close tasks saturate near 100% for most methods, DISC shows clear improvements on tasks requiring precise object manipulation ( pick&place :+5.0% over Octo) and complex action sequences ( others :+2.9%). The consistent performance across categories demon-strates that decoupling instruction from state-conditioned con-TABLE III: Meta-World ML45 multi-task performance by manipulation primitives. DISC maintains advantages across action types, achieving 92.2% overall success rate.                                                                    

> Task Category Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC
> open&close 99.3 100.0 56.8 52.7 99.3 91.5 99.5 pick&place 83.0 69.0 19.5 19.0 81.5 66.5 88.0
> press&pull 93.4 88.1 33.9 38.5 38.4 72.5 93.4
> others 85.8 77.6 54.6 48.1 48.2 68.5 88.7
> Overall 90.6 84.6 44.5 42.9 56.8 73.8 92.2 0200 400 600 800 1000
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Success Rate
> Demo Count: 1
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Demo Count: 3
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Finetune Steps
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Success Rate
> Demo Count: 10
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Finetune Steps
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Demo Count: 20
> DISC (Ours) Octo DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen VQ-BeT

Fig. 4: Few-Shot Adaptation Efficiency on LIBERO-Spatial. The plots show success rate over 1000 fine-tuning steps, with 

K ∈ { 1, 3, 10 , 20 } demonstrations. DISC shows better sample efficiency than state-of-the-art baselines like Octo and DP. trol benefits diverse manipulation primitives across task cate-gories, not just specific tasks in isolation. 

C. Few-Shot Adaptation to Unseen Tasks (RQ2) 

We evaluate the adaptation efficiency of DISC on held-out LIBERO-Spatial tasks. This experiment assesses whether the structured parameter manifold learned by our hypernetwork enables efficient transfer to novel tasks under varying data budgets ( K ∈ { 1, 3, 10 , 20 } demonstrations). a) Adaptation Protocol: Our adaptation protocol ensures a rigorous comparison across architectures. For Hypernetwork-based methods, we query the frozen hypernetwork with the new instruction to generate a policy initialization θinit  

> π

, then fine-tune only the generated parameters. For entangled base-lines, we adopt the standard LoRA [12] strategy. To maintain fairness, the trainable parameter count for LoRA adapters is matched ( ≈ 0.74M) to that of our generated policies. All methods are optimized using the same loss and optimizer for 1,000 gradient steps. We report the success rate evaluated at key checkpoints across different fine-tuning steps, averaged over 20 evaluation episodes per task. 

b) Results and Analysis: Figure 4 highlights DISC ’s superior sample efficiency across diverse data regimes. No-tably, in the extreme few-shot setting ( K = 1 , 3), DISC 

achieves non-trivial success rates where diffusion-based meth-ods (DP, DiT) struggle near 0% performance. With very few demonstrations, entangled architectures lack sufficient data to disentangle task specification from state observation, causing the optimization to collapse onto spurious visual correlations. 

DISC ’s decoupled architecture sidesteps this failure: because the hypernetwork has already encoded task semantics into the generated initialization, fine-tuning only needs to adjust visuomotor precision rather than learn task identity from scratch. Furthermore, DISC demonstrates rapid convergence :as seen in the K = 10 and K = 20 plots, our performance curve rises sharply within the first 200 steps, significantly outpacing baselines like Octo which exhibit a slower “warm-up” phase. This confirms that the hypernetwork provides a se-mantically informed initialization near the task-optimal region, transforming adaptation from a global search over an entangled parameter space into a local refinement of a compact, well-initialized policy. See the appendix for additional results. 

D. Language Grounding and Structure Analysis (RQ3) a) Semantic Grounding under Linguistic Variation: Acentral claim of DISC is that the hypernetwork learns to extract task semantics from language, not memorize surface-level token patterns. To test this, all methods are retrained under identical conditions using augmented language data: 50 paraphrased instructions per task (e.g., “pick up the red block” → “grab the crimson cube”), and then evaluated on 10 additional held-out descriptions not seen during training. This measures each architecture’s ability to map diverse phrasings of the same task to functionally equivalent control behavior – a test of whether the model grounds task meaning rather than memorizes specific wording. As shown in Table IV, 

DISC achieves the highest performance on both benchmarks: 85.4% on LIBERO-90 (vs. Octo’s 80.6%) and 91.8% on Meta-World (vs. Octo’s 90.3%). This result follows naturally from 

DISC ’s architecture. Because the hypernetwork must decode an instruction into a complete set of target policy parameters 

– the only channel through which language influences the task-specific action mapping – it is incentivized to extract the underlying task specification rather than relying on specific lexical patterns. In entangled architectures, language tokens TABLE IV: Semantic grounding under linguistic variation. All methods are retrained with paraphrased data and evaluated on held-out descriptions. DISC maintains higher success rates, in-dicating that the decoupled architecture grounds task meaning rather than memorizes specific phrasings.                      

> Dataset Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC
> LIBERO-90 80.6 76.4 34.5 29.7 66.4 45.9 85.4
> Meta-World 90.3 85.9 49.5 23.3 79.2 83.1 91.8

Fig. 5: t-SNE visualization of generated policy parameters. Semantically similar tasks cluster based on functional mean-ing, indicating that the hypernetwork maps linguistic task specifications to a structured parameter manifold. and visual tokens share processing stages, allowing the net-work to form spurious associations between particular word tokens and visual features. When phrasing changes, these associations break. 

b) Parameter Space Visualization: Figure 5 visualizes the generated parameter manifold via t-SNE [23], revealing that the hypernetwork organizes policy parameters by func-tional semantics rather than visual similarity. We observe three key properties: (1) Action-Type Separation: A macroscopic distinction exists between articulated object manipulation 

(Tasks 1–8, central cluster) and pick-and-place tasks (Tasks 10–24, periphery), indicating the capture of high-level control primitives in the generated weights. (2) Functional Grouping: 

The central cluster further separates tasks by object affordance, distinguishing Cabinet/Drawer interactions (Tasks 5–8) from Stove and Microwave operations. (3) Semantic Continuity: 

Inverse operations, such as Turn On/Off Stove (Tasks 1–2) and Open/Close Microwave (Tasks 3–4), are mapped as nearest neighbors. This topology confirms that the hypernetwork has learned a mapping where semantic proximity in language corresponds to geometric proximity in the weight manifold. This structure directly explains the few-shot adaptation advan-tages observed in Section V-C: novel tasks with semantically similar instructions receive nearby initializations, reducing the distance that fine-tuning must traverse. 

E. Real-World Deployment (RQ4) 

The simulation experiments establish DISC ’s advantages under controlled conditions. We now evaluate whether the decoupling principle transfers to physical robot settings, where TABLE V: Real-world performance on 9 combinatorial tasks. The setup involves picking one of 3 target objects into one of 3 containers in a cluttered scene where visual con-text is shared across all tasks. Success rates (%) averaged over 30 episodes. (Abbr: R.A.=Red Apple, G.A.=Green Ap-ple, W.M.=Watermelon; S.G.=Small Gray, L.R.=Large Red, L.G.=Light Gray).                                                                           

> ID Instruction (Obj →Container) H-Zero DP Octo DISC
> 01 R.A. →S.G. Bowl 73.3 60.0 73.3 96.7
> 02 R.A. →L.R. Bowl 10.0 23.3 53.3 83.3
> 03 R.A. →L.G. Box 13.3 33.3 70.0 90.0
> 04 G.A. →S.G. Bowl 3.3 43.3 80.0 93.3
> 05 G.A. →L.R. Bowl 6.7 56.7 73.3 53.3 06 G.A. →L.G. Box 0.0 76.7 83.3 100.0
> 07 W.M. →S.G. Bowl 36.7 53.3 90.0 90.0
> 08 W.M. →L.R. Bowl 16.7 96.7 93.3 86.7 09 W.M. →L.G. Box 26.7 66.7 96.7 83.3
> Average Success Rate (%) 18.5 57.0 78.5 86.4

richer visual correlations, increased perceptual noise, and narrower grounding margins exacerbate observation leakage. We evaluate DISC on the combinatorial benchmark de-scribed in Section V-A, which provides a direct test of ob-servation leakage on a physical robot. The 9 tasks are formed by the Cartesian product of 3 distinct objects (Red Apple, Green Apple, Watermelon) and 3 target containers (Small Gray Bowl, Large Red Bowl, Light Gray Box), all presented simultaneously in a cluttered workspace with distractors. This setting is particularly revealing: because the same objects and containers are present in every task, visual context is nearly identical across all 9 tasks. A policy that has learned scene-to-action mappings through observation leakage will systematically confuse tasks that share visual context, while a policy whose behavior is determined by language-generated policy parameters will distinguish them correctly. As shown in Table V, DISC achieves the highest average success rate, outperforming all baselines by clear margins. Qualitative analysis reveals distinct failure modes that align with our theoretical framework. HyperZero frequently fails due to spatial precision errors (e.g., “air grasps”), indicating that without the iterative refinement stage, the generated pa-rameters lack sufficient fidelity for precise physical control – validating the architectural contribution of our optimization-inspired refinement module. Entangled baselines exhibit a qualitatively different failure: Octo and DP often achieve cor-rect localization but suffer from orientation misalignment , sug-gesting that their shared representations have learned coarse scene-to-action associations rather than precise language-driven control. This is the signature of observation leakage: the policy partially succeeds by mapping visual context to approximate actions, but fails when the task requires fine-grained distinctions that only language can resolve. Notably, Octo performs well on visually distinctive tasks (e.g., Task 09, Watermelon → Light Gray Box) but degrades sharply on tasks requiring subtle container distinctions (e.g., Task 02, Red Apple → Large Red Bowl vs. Small Gray Bowl) – precisely the failure mode predicted when visual context rather than language determines behavior. DISC mitigates both failure modes: the decoupled architecture ensures that task identity is encoded entirely in the generated parameters, eliminating observation leakage, while the refinement module provides the parameter precision needed for reliable physical execution. 

a) Real-World Failure Analysis: DISC ’s only sub-baseline result is on Task 05 (G.A. → L.R. Bowl, 53.3%), where the gripper tends to grasp the apple at suboptimal positions, leading to drops during transport. Notably, DISC 

achieves 93.3% and 100% on the other two Green Apple tasks (04, 06) and 83.3% on the same target container with a dif-ferent object (Task 02), confirming that the failure stems from execution-level imprecision rather than a language-grounding error. This indicates that the current bottleneck is the compact MLP target policy, which can be insufficient for physically demanding placements. Generating more expressive target policies (e.g., diffusion- or flow-based) is a promising direction for further improving precision and robustness. 

Summary. Across simulation and real-world settings, our experiments confirm that decoupling instruction from state-conditioned control yields consistent improvements in multi-task performance, few-shot adaptation, semantic grounding, and physical deployment. These advantages scale with task complexity and visual ambiguity – precisely the conditions under which task-state entanglement is most damaging, and where DISC ’s architectural guarantees are most valuable. VI. C ONCLUSION 

The central finding of this work is that where language enters a policy architecture matters more than how it is encoded. Task-state entanglement is not merely a training problem solvable with more data or larger models – it is a structural property of shared-parameter designs. DISC 

demonstrates that generating task-specific policy parameters from language blocks the shared action-mapping pathway behind this entanglement, recovering instruction grounding, generalization, and few-shot adaptation beyond what scaling entangled architectures has achieved. The learned parameter manifold organizes tasks as geometric neighbors in weight space without explicit supervision, suggesting that decoupling unlocks structure entangled architectures cannot express. In practice, DISC is most attractive when reliable grounding, efficient control, and adaptation from limited robot data are primary requirements. Large pretrained VLAs remain com-plementary: they are well suited to data-rich and compute-rich settings where broad pretraining can be fully exploited. 

Limitations. The main practical trade-off of DISC lies on the training side, where it can require more memory and longer optimization than comparable static policies. Under-specified instructions may also surface uncertainty rather than being silently resolved through observation leakage, motivat-ing future work on more efficient refinement, uncertainty-aware clarification, and broader multi-modal extensions. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work is supported by the Early Career Scheme of the Research Grants Council (RGC) grant # 27207224, the HKU-100 Award, a donation from the Musketeers Foundation, and in part by the JC STEM Lab of Autonomous Intelligent Systems funded by The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. REFERENCES 

[1] I˜ nigo Alonso, Gorka Azkune, Ander Salaberria, Jeremy Barnes, and Oier Lopez de Lacalle. Vision-language models struggle to align entities across modalities. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2025 , pages 18846–18862, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.965. [2] Jacob Beck, Matthew Thomas Jackson, Risto Vuorio, and Shimon Whiteson. Hypernetworks in meta-reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1478– 1487. PMLR, 2023. [3] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al. pi 0 : A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [4] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yev-gen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817 , 2022. [5] Qingwen Bu, Yanting Yang, Jisong Cai, Shenyuan Gao, Guanghui Ren, Maoqing Yao, Ping Luo, and Hongyang Li. Univla: Learning to act anywhere with task-centric latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06111 , 2025. [6] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649241273668, 2023. [7] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-rectional transformers for language understanding. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 4171–4186. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, 2019. URL https://aclanthology.org/ N19-1423. [8] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep net-works. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017. [9] David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.09106 , 2016. [10] Siddhant Haldar, Zhuoran Peng, and Lerrel Pinto. Baku: An efficient transformer for multi-task policy learning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 141208–141239, 2024. [11] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [12] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR , 1(2):3, 2022. [13] Huang Huang, Fangchen Liu, Letian Fu, Tingfan Wu, Mustafa Mukadam, Jitendra Malik, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. Otter: A vision-language-action model with text-aware feature extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03734 , 2025. [14] Yizhou Huang, Kevin Xie, Homanga Bharadhwaj, and Florian Shkurti. Continual model-based reinforcement learning with hypernetworks. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 799–805. IEEE, 2021. [15] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Es-mail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. pi 0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [16] Tsung-Wei Ke, Nikolaos Gkanatsios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 3d diffuser actor: Policy diffusion with 3d scene representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10885 ,2024. [17] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [18] Chengmeng Li, Junjie Wen, Yaxin Peng, Yan Peng, and Yichen Zhu. Pointvla: Injecting the 3d world into vision-language-action models. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 11(3):2506–2513, 2026. [19] Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang, Ya Jing, Weinan Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01378 , 2023. [20] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44776– 44791, 2023. [21] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024. [22] Zhining Liu, Ziyi Chen, Hui Liu, Chen Luo, Xianfeng Tang, Suhang Wang, Joy Zeng, Zhenwei Dai, Zhan Shi, Tianxin Wei, Benoit Dumoulin, and Hanghang Tong. Seeing but not believing: Probing the disconnect between visual attention and answer correctness in VLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17771 , 2025. [23] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visu-alizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research , 9(Nov):2579–2605, 2008. [24] Ankan Mullick, Saransh Sharma, Abhik Jana, and Pawan Goyal. Text takes over: A study of modality bias in multimodal intent detection. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24040–24070, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2025. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main. 1226. [25] Anupam Pani and Yanchao Yang. Gaze-vlm: Bridging gaze and vlms through attention regularization for ego-centric understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.21356 ,2025. [26] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffu-sion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 4195–4205, 2023. [27] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. [28] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceed-ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 139, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/radford21a.html. [29] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of machine learning research , 21(140):1–67, 2020. [30] Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Ser-gio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al. A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175 , 2022. [31] Hanxiang Ren, Li Sun, Xulong Wang, Pei Zhou, Zewen Wu, Siyan Dong, Difan Zou, Youyi Zheng, and Yanchao Yang. Hypogen: Optimization-biased hypernetworks for generalizable policy generation. In The Thirteenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [32] Moritz Reuss, Maximilian Li, Xiaogang Jia, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Goal-conditioned imitation learning us-ing score-based diffusion policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532 , 2023. [33] Moritz Reuss, Jyothish Pari, Pulkit Agrawal, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Efficient diffusion transformer policies with mixture of expert denoisers for multitask learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12953 , 2024. [34] Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari, Charlotte Morissette, Fran-cois R Hogan, Gregory Dudek, and David Meger. Hyper-networks for zero-shot transfer in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 9579–9587, 2023. [35] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention ,pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. [36] Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pages 1842– 1850. PMLR, 2016. [37] Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, Zichen Cui, Ariuntuya Arty Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:22955–22968, 2022. [38] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototyp-ical networks for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [39] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 , 2020. [40] Jiaqi Tang, Yinsong Xu, Yang Liu, and Qingchao Chen. Shaping initial state prevents modality competition in multi-modal fusion: A two-stage scheduling framework via fast partial information decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20840 , 2025. [41] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213 , 2024. [42] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [43] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pages 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020. [44] Yanjie Ze, Gu Zhang, Kangning Zhang, Chenyuan Hu, Muhan Wang, and Huazhe Xu. 3d diffusion policy: Generalizable visuomotor policy learning via simple 3d representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03954 , 2024. [45] Wenyao Zhang, Hongsi Liu, Zekun Qi, Yunnan Wang, Xinqiang Yu, Jiazhao Zhang, Runpei Dong, Jiawei He, Fan Lu, He Wang, et al. Dreamvla: a vision-language-action model dreamed with comprehensive world knowl-edge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04447 , 2025. [46] Pei Zhou and Yanchao Yang. Maxmi: A maximal mutual information criterion for manipulation concept discovery. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 88– 105. Springer, 2024. [47] Pei Zhou, Ruizhe Liu, Qian Luo, Fan Wang, Yibing Song, and Yanchao Yang. Autocgp: Closed-loop concept-guided policies from unlabeled demonstrations. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2025. [48] Pei Zhou, Wanting Yao, Qian Luo, Xunzhe Zhou, and Yanchao Yang. Hyper-goalnet: Goal-conditioned manip-ulation policy learning with hypernetworks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:83438– 83469, 2026. [49] Brianna Zitkovich, Tianhe Yu, Sichun Xu, Peng Xu, Ted Xiao, Fei Xia, Jialin Wu, Paul Wohlhart, Stefan Welker, Ayzaan Wahid, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023. APPENDIX APROBLEM FORMULATION DETAILS 

A. State and Action Spaces 

The state space S ⊆ RH×W ×C × Rds consists of:  

> •

RGB images It ∈ RH×W ×C with resolution H × W and 

C = 3 color channels. Specifically, in LIBERO-90 experi-ments, an additional gripper-view image is also included.  

> •

Proprioceptive state st ∈ Rds including end-effector pose and gripper state. The continuous action space A ⊆ Rda represents target joint velocities or end-effector displacements, depending on the control mode. The transition dynamics T : S×A → ∆( S),where ∆( S) denotes the probability simplex over S, capture the stochastic nature of manipulation tasks. 

B. Dataset Structure 

Each demonstration trajectory ξij has a horizon T ij and consists of:  

> •

Observations oi,j t = ( Ii,j t , s i,j t ) combining visual and pro-prioceptive information.  

> •

Expert actions ai,j t ∈ A recorded from human demonstra-tions or privileged controllers.  

> •

Language instruction li describing the task goal in natural language. APPENDIX BEXAMPLES OF TASK -S TATE ENTANGLED ARCHITECTURES 

Modern language-conditioned robotic policies employ var-ious forms of task-state entanglement: 

Transformer-based Fusion. Policies like Octo [41] tok-enize both language and visual inputs, concatenating them into a single sequence for processing. The self-attention mechanism allows arbitrary interactions between language and visual tokens, creating entangled representations throughout the network depth. 

Diffusion-based Fusion. Diffusion Policies [6] typically incorporate language by concatenating embeddings with visual features or inputs, followed by architecture-specific condition-ing mechanisms:  

> •

FiLM conditioning: Language embeddings modulate visual features through affine transformations when using U-Net-based diffusion policies.  

> •

Cross-attention: Action denoising queries attend to both language and visual keys when using transformer-based diffusion policies (DiT). In all cases, the action prediction emerges from representa-tions where language and vision have been deeply intertwined through non-linear transformations, making it difficult to iso-late their individual contributions. APPENDIX CENVIRONMENTAL SETUP AND BASELINES 

A. Task Statistics Overview 

We evaluate on two benchmarks: LIBERO-90 and Meta-World ML45. 

LIBERO-90: Contains 90 tasks in total.  

> •

Easy (11 tasks): Single-object manipulation.  

> •

Medium (35 tasks): Multi-object coordination.  

> •

Long (44 tasks): Sequential multi-step goals. Please refer to Appendix L-A for the complete list of all 90 tasks. 

Meta-World ML45: Contains 45 training tasks covering pick-place, push, press, and open-close interactions. The full list is provided in Appendix L-B. 

B. Sampling Strategy 

For all the experiments, we first construct a global list of all transitions across the dataset, where each entry is a tuple (task , episode , timestep ). At training time, each batch is formed by uniformly sampling transitions from this list. For language augmentation experiments in the main paper, we use the same transition-level sampling strategy. In addition, for each sampled transition we randomly draw a paraphrased instruction from that task’s pool of 50 paraphrases, so the model sees diverse linguistic realizations of the same under-lying task during training. 

C. Baseline Implementation Details 

We compare against six state-of-the-art methods across two categories: 

Task-state Entangled Methods:  

> •

Octo [41]: Transformer processing concatenated language-vision tokens with self-attention mechanism.  

> •

VQ-BeT [37]: Vector-quantized behavior transformer using self-attention mechanism.  

> •

Diffusion Policy [6]: UNet-based diffusion with FiLM conditioning for language and observation information.  

> •

DiT [6]: Diffusion transformer using cross-attention for language and observation information. 

Hypernetwork Methods:  

> •

HyPoGen [31]: Iterative hypernetwork with optimization bias to decode the policy parameters from the language embedding.  

> •

HyperZero [34]: Direct MLP mapping from language to pa-rameters to decode the policy parameters from the language embedding. All baselines are implemented in PyTorch with the follow-ing specifications: 

Shared Components:  

> •

Visual encoder: ResNet-18 pretrained on ImageNet, fine-tuned during training.  

> •

Language encoder: T5-small encoder [29], and is kept frozen during training in LIBERO-90 and Meta-World ex-periments.  

> •

Action space: 6-DoF end-effector delta and 1-dim state of gripper for LIBERO, 3-DOF end-effector delta and 1-dim gripper for Meta-World. 

Model-Specific Details: • Octo: 8-layer transformer, 8 attention heads, hidden dim 512.  

> •

VQ-BeT: Codebook size 16 with 2 groups, 8-layer trans-former, 8 attention heads, hidden dim 488.  

> •

Diffusion Policy: 100 denoising steps, DDIM sampler, FiLM conditioning, down-scale dims [128, 256, 512], and timestep embedding dim 256.  

> •

DiT: 8-layer diffusion transformer, cross-attention for lan-guage and observation.  

> •

HyPoGen: 3 refinement blocks, hidden dim 32.  

> •

HyperZero: 5-layer MLP hypernetwork, hidden dim 48, ReLU activations. For all hypernet-based methods, we use the same policy network of a 5-layer MLP with hidden dim 320, resulting in a total parameter of around 0.74M in LIBERO and real-world experiments, and 0.57M in Meta-World experiments. To ensure a fair comparison, we maintain a consistent model capacity across all methods above, with approximately 30M trainable parameters. 

Large-scale Pretrained Reference Models:  

> •

π0: The official Pi-0 checkpoint [3], fine-tuned on LIBERO-90 to serve as a high-performance baseline.  

> •

π0.5: The official Pi-0.5 checkpoint [15], fine-tuned on LIBERO-90 to serve as an additional reference point. APPENDIX DTRAINING AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

A. Language Encoder 

We employ T5-small [29] as our language encoder ΦL,mapping natural language instructions into 512-dimensional embeddings. Instructions are capped at a maximum length of 32 tokens. To bridge the dimension gap, an additional learned projection network aligns these language embeddings with the hypernetwork’s task-conditioning space. 

B. Neural Gradient Estimation and Update Module 

The iterative refinement module (Stage 2) employs a so-phisticated neural gradient estimation mechanism inspired by meta-learning. It is important to note that this is not a true optimization process, but a learned process that mimics the op-timization process. At each refinement step t ∈ { 0, . . . , T −1},the module simulates an optimization process through three sub-networks: 

Forward Pass Simulation: The module first simulates a forward pass through the target network to estimate task-specific activation patterns: 

(z0, . . . , z n) = FForward (θtπ , e l; ϕ2,f ) (12) where zi represents estimated activations at layer i and ϕ2,f 

are the forward simulator parameters. 

Backward Pass Simulation: Next, it simulates a backward pass to compute pseudo-gradients: 

 ∂L ∂z n

, . . . , ∂L ∂z 1



= FBackward (θtπ , e l, z 0, . . . , z n; ϕ2,b ) (13) These pseudo-gradients are not true gradients of an explicit loss function but learned signals that guide parameter updates toward task-specific optima. 

Meta-Update Network: Finally, a meta-update network computes the parameter update: 

∆θt = FMeta 



θtπ , e l, ∂L ∂z n

, . . . , ∂L ∂z 1

; ϕ2,m 



(14) The complete refinement module parameters are denoted as 

ϕ2 = {ϕ2,f , ϕ 2,b , ϕ 2,m }. This design allows the hypernetwork to learn task-specific optimization trajectories in parameter space, effectively performing learned optimization tailored to each language instruction. 

Attention-Based Implementation Details: Our forward and backward pass simulators leverage cross-attention mech-anisms to model neural gradient computation through tok-enized representations. We tokenize parameter matrices θi

of layer i row-wise as ωi = {ω1, ω 2, . . . , ω ni } using MLP encoders, while activations zi are tokenized as τ i =

{τ1, τ 2, . . . , τ ni } representing individual neurons. We use a uniform d = 128 for all token representations in our model. The forward simulator FForward implements layer-wise computation as τ i = CrossAttn (ωi, τ i−1, τ i−1), where parameter tokens serve as queries attending over previ-ous layer activations with attention head dimension dk =128 . For backward pass simulation, FBackward estimates Ja-cobians using Jθi = CrossAttn (τ i−1, ωi, ωi) and Jhi =

CrossAttn (ωi, τ i−1, τ i−1) for inter-layer dependencies. Chain rule computations are implemented via attention-based matrix multiplications: ∂L/∂z i−1 = CrossAttn (∂L/∂z i, J hi , J hi ),ensuring modality consistency by using upstream gradients as queries while Jacobian estimates serve as both keys and values. Each cross-attention module employs 4 attention heads with 1 layer, enabling the model to capture fine-grained dependency structures essential for effective parameter generation. 

C. Architectural Design Choices 

The WIN can be implemented as either a multi-layer per-ceptron (MLP) or a Transformer, depending on the complexity of the target network. In our experiments, we employ a 4-layer transformer with cross-attention blocks for the WIN. 

D. Training Details 

Visual Data Augmentation: During training, we apply stan-dard visual augmentations including random resized crops and color jittering to the input RGB images to improve policy robustness. 

Optimization:  

> •

Optimizer: We use the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4, β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .999 , and a weight decay of 1 × 10 −4. 

> •

Learning Rate Schedule: A cosine annealing schedule is employed throughout the training.  

> •

Training Stability: For DiT, we apply gradient clipping with a max norm of 1.0 to ensure stability. Other models do not require gradient clipping. Algorithm 1 Single Step Update for DISC  

> 1:

Input: Parameters θ(t−1) , task embedding el 

> 2:

Output: Updated parameters ∆θ(t−1)  

> 3:

Tokenize parameters for each layer i’s parameter θi: 

> 4:

ωi ← Tokenize (θi) 

> 5:

Compute initial activation τ0: 

> 6:

τ0 ← CrossAttn (learnable query , e l, e l) 

> 7:

Forward Pass Computation Using Cross-Attention:  

> 8:

τi ← CrossAttn (ωi, τ i−1, τ i−1) 

> 9:

Backward Pass and Jacobian Estimation:   

> 10: ∂z i
> ∂z i−1

← CrossAttn (ωi, τ i−1, τ i−1)  

> 11: ∂z i
> ∂θ i

← CrossAttn (τi−1, ω i, ω i) 

> 12:

Gradient Computation:   

> 13: ∂L ∂z i−1

← CrossAttn 

 ∂L ∂z i , ∂z i 

> ∂z i−1

, ∂z i

> ∂z i−1

 

> 14:

∇ωi ← CrossAttn 

 ∂L ∂z i , ∂z i 

> ∂θ i

, ∂z i

> ∂θ i

 

> 15:

Decode into θ space  

> 16:

∆θi ← MLP (∇ωi) and proper reshape  

> •

Precision: We utilize mixed-precision training (BF16) for all models to accelerate computation, with the exception of DiT, which is trained in FP32 to avoid numerical instability. APPENDIX ETRAINING & I NFERENCE COST ANALYSIS 

DISC follows a “Generate Once, Act Many” paradigm: the hypernetwork generates the policy weights once per task/language instruction, after which only the lightweight Target Network is used in the control loop. In Table VI, we show the computation cost comparison between DISC 

with other baselines. DISC and HyPoGen share the same lightweight target network, so their control-loop inference speed is effectively identical, both running comfortably in the sub-millisecond regime. Both hypernetwork-based methods are substantially faster than monolithic architectures like Octo, and orders of magnitude faster than diffusion-based policies such as Diffusion Policy. Although DISC employs a more expressive hypernetwork and its weight generation is corre-spondingly slower, this cost remains real-time and is incurred only once per task. As a result, the weight-generation overhead is negligible in the overall control budget, while DISC still enjoys the efficiency benefits of an extremely fast controller. 

DISC and HyPoGen share the same lightweight target network, so their control-loop inference speed is effectively identical. Both are substantially faster than monolithic ar-chitectures like Octo, and orders of magnitude faster than diffusion-based policies. APPENDIX FFEW -S HOT ADAPTATION DETAILS 

A. Comparison with Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning 

To ensure a fair comparison, we control the number of trainable parameters to be approximately the same ( ≈ 0.74M) across all methods. Specifically, for entangled architectures, TABLE VI: Computational cost breakdown for DISC and baselines on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.                           

> Component / Model Time (ms) FPS
> DISC Weight Gen.
> (Full hypernet run) 15.75 ∼64
> DISC Target Net
> (Policy execution) 0.13 ∼7422
> HyPoGen Weight Gen.
> (Full hypernet run) 3.38 ∼295
> End-to-End Control Loop
> DISC (Ours)
> (Fastest control loop) 0.67 ∼1485
> HyPoGen
> (Same target net) 0.67 ∼1485
> Octo
> (One-pass transformer) 1.86 ∼539
> Diffusion Policy
> (Multi-step denoising) 160.17 ∼6

we optimize LoRA parameters attached to the backbone; for hypernetwork-based architectures (including DISC ), we fine-tune the lightweight target policy generated by the frozen hypernetwork. While traditional methods like Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [12] are effective for general adaptation, they face specific challenges when applied to policies with task-state entanglement. We compare the two approaches from the following perspectives:  

> •

Decoupled vs. Entangled Updates: LoRA updates must navigate through the backbone’s entangled representations, where modifications for new language instructions can inad-vertently affect established visuomotor features. In contrast, 

DISC operates in a decoupled parameter space, exclusively updating the target policy θπ . This ensures that visual representation learning remains stable while allowing for rapid policy adaptation.  

> •

Initialization Quality: Standard parameter-efficient meth-ods typically initialize updates from scratch. Conversely, 

DISC leverages the frozen hypernetwork Hϕ to provide a task-conditioned initialization. This places the optimization in a semantically informed region of the parameter space, significantly reducing the adaptation effort compared to learning offsets from a generic base model. 

B. Adaptation Algorithm Implementation 

For few-shot adaptation with K demonstrations, we employ the procedure outlined in Algorithm 2. The key insight is that the hypernetwork-generated initial-ization θ(0)  

> π

provides a strong task-specific prior. This positions the optimization in a favorable region of the parameter space, enabling rapid convergence. The hypernetwork parameters ϕ

remain frozen throughout this process, preserving the learned meta-knowledge. Typically, the adaptation converges within 50-200 gradient steps for K ∈ [1 , 5] .TABLE VII: Success rates (%) on the LIBERO-10 suite. Bold indicates the best result; underline indicates the second best, and the same convention applies hereafter.                                                                                                                                                                        

> Demos Steps Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC
> 103.5 3.0 3.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 50 12.5 9.0 1.0 2.0 13.5 3.5 16.0 200 9.5 15.5 0.0 0.0 10.0 14.0 16.0 500 10.5 11.0 0.0 1.0 13.0 19.0 24.0 1000 14.0 10.0 2.0 2.0 29.0 22.0 20.5
> 350 17.0 8.5 2.0 2.0 16.5 16.0 13.5 200 24.5 13.5 0.0 1.5 22.0 27.0 22.5 500 16.0 19.5 0.0 5.5 28.5 27.0 30.0 1000 17.5 25.5 0.0 3.0 34.5 26.0 30.0
> 550 11.5 11.0 2.0 1.0 23.0 17.0 19.0 200 27.5 19.5 0.5 3.0 22.0 18.0 21.5 500 28.0 29.0 0.0 1.5 30.0 21.0 24.0 1000 22.5 29.0 0.5 9.5 27.0 28.5 31.0
> 10 50 17.5 14.5 0.0 1.5 21.0 8.5 23.0 200 26.0 25.0 0.0 5.0 33.5 23.5 34.0 500 23.5 36.0 0.0 3.5 32.0 25.5 32.0 1000 32.5 39.0 0.0 5.0 38.0 33.5 38.5
> 20 50 21.5 16.5 0.0 1.5 30.0 16.0 29.0 200 24.5 20.0 0.0 5.5 35.5 34.5 33.0 500 29.5 34.0 0.0 6.0 41.0 43.5 27.5 1000 33.5 41.0 0.0 4.0 46.5 50.0 51.0
> Average Rank (Lower is Better) 3.62 3.52 6.57 6.00 2.33 3.43 2.14

Algorithm 2 Few-Shot Adaptation for DISC 

Require: Novel task instruction lnew , demonstrations Dnew =

{ξj }Kj=1 , learning rate η

Ensure: Adapted policy parameters θ∗ 

> π
> 1:

Generate initial parameters: θ(0)  

> π

← H ϕ(Φ L(lnew ))  

> 2:

Initialize optimizer (e.g., Adam)  

> 3:

for step t = 1 to Tmax do  

> 4:

Sample batch B from Dnew  

> 5:

Compute loss: L = 1

> |B|

P   

> (ok,a k)∈B

∥π(ok; θπ ) − ak∥22 

> 6:

Update parameters: θπ ← θπ − η∇θπ L 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

return θ∗ 

> π

← θπ

C. More Few-shot Adaptation Results 

We present a comprehensive evaluation of few-shot adap-tation performance across four LIBERO benchmark suites: LIBERO-10, LIBERO-Goal, LIBERO-Object, and LIBERO-Spatial. The detailed success rates across varying numbers of demonstrations ( K ∈ { 1, 3, 5, 10 , 20 }) and adaptation steps are reported in Tables VII, VIII, IX, and X. 

Overall Performance and Ranking. As indicated by the average rank metrics, DISC consistently outperforms baselines across all task suites. Specifically, DISC achieves the best (lowest) average rank on LIBERO-10 (2.14), LIBERO-Goal (1.57), LIBERO-Spatial (1.14), and LIBERO-Object (2.30). This demonstrates the method’s superior robustness and versa-tility across diverse manipulation tasks, regardless of whether the task requires long-horizon sequencing, precise spatial positioning, or object manipulation. 

Adaptation Efficiency. A key advantage of DISC is its rapid convergence. In the extremely low-data regime (e.g., K =1 or K = 3 ), DISC often achieves non-trivial success rates within just 50 to 200 gradient steps, whereas baselines like Octo typically require significantly more iterations or data to achieve a better performance. For instance, in LIBERO-Goal (Table VIII) with only 1 demonstration, DISC reaches 38.5% success rate at 50 steps, significantly surpassing the baselines. 

Comparison with Baselines. Previous strong baselines like VQ-BeT perform well in specific domains (e.g., object-centric tasks). However, DISC surpasses VQ-BeT even on the LIBERO-Object suite (Avg Rank 2.30 vs. 2.58) while maintaining a significant lead in spatial and goal-conditioned tasks. Furthermore, DISC consistently outperforms the abla-tion baseline H-Gen and H-Zero, validating the necessity and effectiveness of the two-stage parameter generation. APPENDIX GLANGUAGE ENCODER ABLATION 

We further investigate how the choice of language encoder affects the quality of the generated policy parameters. Table XI reports the success rates on LIBERO-90 when using different off-the-shelf encoders to obtain the task embedding el. DISC 

achieves the highest performance when equipped with a T5-small encoder (94.3%), while replacing T5-small with CLIP-base [28] or BERT-base [7] leads to notable degradation (88.9% and 81.2%, respectively). We hypothesize that T5’s text-to-text pre-training objective provides richer semantic and syntactic structure, enabling the hypernetwork to construct a more coherent parameter manifold from language input. In contrast, CLIP-base is primarily optimized for image-text alignment, and BERT-base focuses on masked-token predic-tion, both of which offer weaker task-level semantics for TABLE VIII: Success rates (%) on LIBERO-goal suite 

Demos Steps Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC 

1 0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 1.5 50 10.5 16.0 0.0 3.0 38.5 21.0 38.5 200 22.0 35.0 0.0 5.5 43.5 34.5 38.0 500 33.0 43.0 1.0 15.0 44.5 35.5 41.5 1000 34.0 44.5 0.5 21.0 42.0 43.5 37.5 

3 50 12.5 20.0 0.5 3.0 47.5 29.0 52.5 200 14.5 39.0 1.0 5.5 45.5 35.5 66.5 500 20.5 58.0 0.5 12.0 52.0 46.5 67.5 1000 40.0 67.0 1.0 25.0 55.5 58.5 65.5 

5 50 16.0 15.5 0.5 4.0 49.0 50.0 60.0 200 38.0 48.0 1.5 2.5 54.5 44.5 70.0 500 45.5 56.0 0.5 9.5 59.0 66.0 73.0 1000 55.0 68.5 0.0 21.5 59.5 59.0 68.0 

10 50 16.5 20.5 0.0 2.0 63.0 45.0 75.5 200 40.5 52.0 0.5 4.5 61.0 60.5 74.0 500 46.0 72.5 1.0 6.5 68.0 77.5 65.0 1000 58.0 75.5 1.0 16.5 75.5 69.5 81.0 

20 50 13.5 23.5 0.5 1.0 52.0 43.0 68.0 200 41.0 57.0 2.0 4.5 73.0 61.0 76.5 500 62.0 71.5 1.5 6.5 79.5 69.5 82.5 1000 63.5 74.0 1.5 15.0 67.0 71.5 82.0 

Average Rank (Lower is Better) 4.86 2.90 6.81 5.86 2.38 3.05 1.57 

TABLE IX: Success rates (%) on LIBERO-object suite 

Demos Steps Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC 

1 0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 9.5 3.5 200 1.0 2.5 0.0 0.0 2.5 9.0 1.5 500 0.0 8.5 0.0 0.0 5.0 8.5 0.0 1000 1.5 10.0 0.0 0.5 10.0 17.0 1.5 

3 50 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 0.0 1.5 200 1.5 28.0 0.0 0.0 3.5 5.0 15.0 500 5.5 18.0 0.0 0.0 13.0 8.5 22.5 1000 8.5 19.5 0.0 0.5 19.5 9.5 24.5 

5 50 0.0 4.5 0.0 0.0 5.0 9.0 15.0 200 5.0 27.5 0.0 0.0 3.5 5.5 12.0 500 4.0 25.5 0.0 0.0 24.5 13.5 22.0 1000 1.0 24.5 0.0 0.0 20.0 18.5 28.5 

10 50 0.0 4.5 0.0 0.0 21.5 22.5 5.0 200 6.0 35.5 0.0 0.0 24.5 2.5 8.0 500 16.0 16.5 0.0 0.0 31.5 14.5 33.5 1000 12.5 22.5 0.0 0.0 31.0 33.5 40.0 

20 50 0.0 2.5 0.0 0.0 9.0 16.5 17.5 200 4.0 45.0 0.0 0.0 18.0 35.0 20.0 500 13.5 31.0 0.0 0.0 26.0 52.0 30.0 1000 33.0 37.5 0.0 0.0 33.0 29.0 49.5 

Average Rank (Lower is Better) 4.95 2.58 6.30 6.20 2.85 2.83 2.30 

generating policy parameters. Based on these results, we adopt T5-small as our default language encoder throughout all experiments. APPENDIX HHYPERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE ABLATION 

To validate our two-stage, coarse-to-fine generation process, which combines a Weight Initialization Network (WIN) with iterative refinement, we ablate each component. The results in Table XII demonstrate that both stages are critical for optimal performance. While removing the WIN module ( DISC 

w/o WIN ) maintains high success on Easy tasks (93.6%), performance drops significantly on Long-horizon tasks (68.5% vs. 92.7%), highlighting the difficulty of optimizing complex behaviors without a strong initialization. Conversely, using only the coarse initialization ( DISC w/ WIN Only ) achieves a decent overall success rate of 78.2% but lacks the precision required for harder tasks. Our full model , which integrates both stages, achieves the highest performance (94.3%), sub-stantially outperforming the WIN-only variant by +18.0% on TABLE X: Success rates (%) on LIBERO-spatial suite                                                                                                                                                                        

> Demos Steps Octo VQ-BeT DP DiT H-Zero H-Gen DISC
> 100.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 50 27.5 11.5 0.0 0.0 30.5 23.0 31.0 200 29.5 26.5 0.0 2.0 34.5 38.5 45.5 500 36.0 36.5 0.5 8.0 37.0 42.5 46.5 1000 34.0 45.0 0.0 8.0 53.0 38.0 55.0
> 350 22.5 13.5 0.5 0.0 34.0 36.5 48.5 200 44.5 36.5 0.0 1.0 43.0 45.0 54.5 500 45.5 50.5 0.0 4.0 49.5 53.5 68.0 1000 46.0 54.5 0.0 10.5 46.5 52.5 66.0
> 550 41.0 25.0 1.0 0.0 43.5 41.5 62.5 200 54.0 44.5 0.0 0.5 57.5 53.0 58.5 500 59.0 47.5 0.0 4.5 50.0 70.0 60.5 1000 59.5 47.5 0.0 8.5 61.0 56.5 62.0
> 10 50 43.5 23.5 1.0 0.0 48.5 55.5 53.5 200 62.0 45.5 0.0 0.0 50.5 48.5 68.5 500 57.5 49.5 0.0 3.0 59.5 58.5 70.5 1000 69.5 58.5 0.5 6.0 58.0 44.0 74.0
> 20 50 43.0 26.5 1.0 0.0 49.5 46.0 60.0 200 63.5 47.5 0.0 0.0 61.5 60.0 67.5 500 69.5 67.5 0.0 1.5 57.0 56.5 76.0 1000 68.0 61.5 0.5 6.5 56.0 56.0 78.5
> Average Rank (Lower is Better) 3.38 4.14 6.43 6.00 2.95 3.05 1.14

TABLE XI: Ablation on the choice of language encoder.         

> T5-small CLIP-base BERT-base
> Octo 84.7% 85.7% 79.3%
> DISC 94.3% 88.9% 81.2%

TABLE XII: Ablation of hypernetwork components on LIBERO-90. Both coarse initialization (WIN) and iterative refinement are essential for performance.                    

> Method Variant Easy Medium Long Overall
> DISC w/o WIN 93.6 84.3 68.5 77.7
> DISC w/ WIN only (no refinement) 87.3 79.7 74.7 78.2
> DISC (full) 97.3 95.3 92.7 94.3

long-horizon tasks. This confirms that coarse initialization and iterative refinement are complementary, with their combination being essential for solving multi-stage manipulation tasks. APPENDIX IDIFFERENT NUMBER OF TASKS 

We vary the number of training tasks using subsets of LIBERO-90 and report success rates in Table XIII. The performance trends for each method are shown below. TABLE XIII: Impact of Task Diversity (Number of Tasks) on LIBERO-90 Success Rate.                     

> Num. Tasks 10 20 40 60 90
> DP 88.0 87.3 76.8 73.6 75.2 Octo 82.0 80.7 82.3 82.5 84.7
> DISC 82.0 86.4 85.6 87.2 94.3

From the results, we observe distinct scaling behaviors across the methods. Diffusion Policy (DP) suffers from neg-ative scaling as task diversity increases: while it starts with a strong performance of 88.0% on 10 tasks, its success rate drops significantly to 75.2% as the number of tasks expands to 90, suggesting potential capacity limitations or task interference when handling a large variety of behaviors. Octo, on the other hand, displays relative stability with performance remaining largely flat (rising marginally from 82.0% to 84.7%), indicat-ing that the architecture is robust but does not gain significant advantages from the increased training distribution. In contrast, 

DISC demonstrates strong positive transfer; starting at 82.0%, its performance improves consistently as more tasks are added, culminating in a 94.3% success rate on the full 90-task suite. This scaling behavior also supports the hypothesis that DISC 

’s hypernetwork learns a semantically structured parameter manifold . Rather than being overwhelmed by task variety, our method leverages the richer task distribution to learn more generalizable policies, effectively outperforming task-state entangled architectures like Octo and Diffusion Policy in high-diversity settings. APPENDIX JREAL ROBOT EXPERIMENTS DETAILS 

In this section, we provide detailed specifications of the real-world experimental setup, the data collection protocol, and a comprehensive visualization of the combinatorial manipulation tasks discussed in the main paper. 

A. Hardware and Environment Setup 

The experimental setup features a RealMan 7-DoF robotic arm equipped with a parallel-jaw gripper. Visual observations are captured via two Intel RealSense D435i cameras: one mounted on a fixed pole to provide a static third-person Fig. 6: Full Visualization of Real-World Combinatorial Tasks. We evaluate DISC on all 9 combinations of the task matrix. Each row corresponds to a specific target object: Top Row: Red Apple; Middle Row: Green Apple; Bottom Row: Watermelon Slice. Column 1 (Initial State): Shows the cluttered starting configuration. Note that within each row, the visual observation is shared across all three downstream tasks. Columns 2-4 (Outcomes): Show the successful execution of DISC conditioned on three distinct instructions: placing the object into the Small Gray Bowl (Col 2), the Large Red Bowl (Col 3), and the Light Gray Box (Col 4). The yellow arrows in the initial states illustrate the three divergent trajectories the policy must generate based solely on language input. view of the workspace, and another mounted on the end-effector to provide a gripper (egocentric) view. Both cameras stream RGB-D images at a resolution of 640 × 480 , which are subsequently resized to 224 × 224 for processing. The workspace contains a set of interactable objects (Red Apple, Green Apple, Watermelon Slice) and containers (Small Gray Bowl, Large Red Bowl, Light Gray Box), along with various distractor objects (e.g., bananas, mangoes, and other fruits) to increase visual clutter and occlusion. 

B. Task Definitions and Combinatorial Protocol 

To rigorously test language grounding, we constructed a combinatorial benchmark consisting of 9 distinct tasks. These tasks represent the Cartesian product of the object set O and the container set C: 

> •

Objects ( O): {Red Apple, Green Apple, Watermelon Slice } 

> •

Containers ( C): {Small Gray Bowl, Large Red Bowl, Light Gray Box }

This results in 3 × 3 = 9 unique language instructions of the form “Pick up the [Object] and place it into the [Container].” 

Visual Ambiguity Control. A critical feature of this bench-mark is the preservation of visual context. As shown in Figure 6, the workspace maintains a globally consistent, clut-tered visual context with all candidate objects simultaneously present. Consequently, the robot must rely solely on the lin-guistic instruction to determine whether to transport the object to destination (b), (c), or (d). This design explicitly penalizes methods that rely on observation leakage or memorize scene-to-action shortcuts. 

C. Data Collection and Evaluation a) Data Collection: We collected expert demonstrations using a teleoperation interface. For each of the 9 tasks, we recorded 100 successful episodes, resulting in a total dataset of 900 episodes. 

b) Evaluation Metrics: During evaluation, a trial is con-sidered a success if and only if the following criteria are met: Fig. 7: Attention Map Visualization for Task-State En-tangled Architectures. We visualize attention maps for an Octo-style Transformer policy on two evaluation tasks. Despite specific language instructions (e.g., “Pick up the book”), the attention mechanisms frequently fail to localize the task-relevant objects. Instead, attention is heavily concentrated on the robot’s manipulator arm (a constant visual feature) or irrelevant background objects. This provides visual evidence of observation leakage : the policy relies on scene-to-action shortcuts rather than true language grounding. 1) The robot successfully grasps the correct target object specified in the instruction. 2) The object is transported to and released inside the correct target container. We evaluate each method over 30 trials per task, totaling 30 ×

9 = 270 evaluation episodes per method. APPENDIX KEXTENDED QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 

To provide concrete evidence for our claims regarding the limitations of task-state entanglement, we conduct qualitative analyses on a representative baseline. These visualizations empirically demonstrate the phenomena of attention misalign-ment and observation leakage, validating our hypothesis that entangled architectures often fail to ground language instruc-tions in the visual scene. 

A. Visual Evidence of Observation Leakage 

We visualize the attention maps from the Transformer layers of a representative entangled baseline: an Octo-style Transformer Policy. As illustrated in Figure 7, these visual-izations reveal a significant disconnect between the semantic requirements of the instruction and the model’s actual visual focus. For instance, in the top row, the instruction explicitly spec-ifies “Pick up the book ...”. However, the policy concentrates its attention almost exclusively on the robot’s gripper and the unrelated caddy structure, ignoring the target object entirely. Similarly, in the bottom row (“Pick up the alphabet soup ...”), the policy fails to focus on the target object. Instead, its attention maps highlight the gripper or diffuse background regions. This pattern consistently demonstrates the mechanism of observation leakage: in the absence of explicit structural decoupling, the entangled network learns to rely on spuri-ous correlations, such as the ever-present robot arm, rather than grounding the variable linguistic concepts (e.g., “book,” “soup”). The model “cheats” by mapping the constant visual feature (the gripper) to actions, bypassing the language in-struction entirely. In contrast, DISC blocks this direct shortcut pathway by construction. Since the target policy receives no language input, task identity must be encoded into the generated policy weights by the hypernetwork, enforcing a structural depen-dency on instruction semantics rather than visual shortcuts. APPENDIX LDETAILED TASK SPLITS 

In this section, we provide the complete list of tasks used in our experiments for both LIBERO-90 and Meta-World. 

A. LIBERO Task Splits 

90 tasks from LIBERO-90 are divided as follows: 

Training Tasks (90):  

> •

Easy (11 tasks): Single-object manipulation (e.g., “turn on the stove”)  

> •

Medium (35 tasks): Multi-object coordination (e.g., “put the black bowl on the plate”)  

> •

Long (44 tasks): Sequential multi-step (e.g., “turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it”) The exact split of tasks is listed in Table XIV and XV. 

B. Meta-World Task Splits 

Similarly, we split Meta-World ML45 into 4 categories: 

Training Tasks (45):  

> •

open&close (8 tasks) : Open or close an object (e.g., “window open”)  

> •

pick&place (4 tasks) : Pick the object up or place it elsewhere (e.g., “pick out of hole”)  

> •

press&pull (16 tasks) : Press the button or lever (e.g., “button press topdown”)  

> •

others (17 tasks) : Other tasks not in previous categories (e.g., “soccer”) These tasks correspond to the 45 training environments in the standard Meta-World ML45 split. The exact split of tasks is listed in Table XVI. TABLE XIV: LIBERO-90 Training Tasks (Part 1: One-Object & Two-Object Short) 

Category Tasks 

One-Object KITCHEN SCENE3 turn on the stove KITCHEN SCENE4 close the bottom drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE8 turn off the stove KITCHEN SCENE9 turn on the stove KITCHEN SCENE10 close the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE2 open the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE5 close the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE7 open the microwave KITCHEN SCENE1 open the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE1 open the bottom drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE6 close the microwave Two-Object KITCHEN SCENE3 put the frying pan on the stove KITCHEN SCENE3 put the moka pot on the stove KITCHEN SCENE4 put the wine bottle on the wine rack KITCHEN SCENE4 put the black bowl on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE4 put the black bowl in the bottom drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE6 put the yellow and white mug to the front of the white mug KITCHEN SCENE8 put the right moka pot on the stove KITCHEN SCENE9 put the frying pan on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE9 put the white bowl on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE9 put the frying pan on the cabinet shelf KITCHEN SCENE9 put the frying pan under the cabinet shelf KITCHEN SCENE10 put the black bowl in the top drawer of the cabinet LIVING ROOM SCENE5 put the white mug on the left plate LIVING ROOM SCENE5 put the yellow and white mug on the right plate LIVING ROOM SCENE5 put the red mug on the left plate LIVING ROOM SCENE5 put the red mug on the right plate LIVING ROOM SCENE6 put the white mug on the plate LIVING ROOM SCENE6 put the red mug on the plate LIVING ROOM SCENE6 put the chocolate pudding to the left of the plate LIVING ROOM SCENE6 put the chocolate pudding to the right of the plate KITCHEN SCENE2 put the black bowl at the back on the plate KITCHEN SCENE2 put the black bowl at the front on the plate KITCHEN SCENE2 put the middle black bowl on the plate KITCHEN SCENE2 put the middle black bowl on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE2 stack the middle black bowl on the back black bowl KITCHEN SCENE2 stack the black bowl at the front on the black bowl in the middle KITCHEN SCENE5 put the black bowl in the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE5 put the black bowl on the plate KITCHEN SCENE5 put the ketchup in the top drawer of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE5 put the black bowl on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE7 put the white bowl on the plate KITCHEN SCENE7 put the white bowl to the right of the plate KITCHEN SCENE1 put the black bowl on top of the cabinet KITCHEN SCENE1 put the black bowl on the plate KITCHEN SCENE4 put the wine bottle in the bottom drawer of the cabinet TABLE XV: LIBERO-90 Training Tasks (Part 2: Long Horizon) 

Category Tasks 

Long-Horizon KITCHEN SCENE4 close the bottom drawer of the cabinet and open the top drawer KITCHEN SCENE9 turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it KITCHEN SCENE10 close the top drawer of the cabinet and put the black bowl on top of it KITCHEN SCENE10 put the butter at the front in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it KITCHEN SCENE10 put the butter at the back in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it KITCHEN SCENE10 put the chocolate pudding in the top drawer of the cabinet and close it LIVING ROOM SCENE1 pick up the cream cheese box and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE1 pick up the alphabet soup and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE1 pick up the tomato sauce and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE2 pick up the orange juice and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE2 pick up the milk and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE2 pick up the butter and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE2 pick up the alphabet soup and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE2 pick up the tomato sauce and put it in the basket LIVING ROOM SCENE4 stack the left bowl on the right bowl and place them in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE4 stack the right bowl on the left bowl and place them in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE4 pick up the black bowl on the left and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE4 pick up the salad dressing and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE4 pick up the chocolate pudding and put it in the tray STUDY SCENE1 pick up the book and place it in the right compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE1 pick up the book and place it in the front compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE1 pick up the yellow and white mug and place it to the right of the caddy STUDY SCENE2 pick up the book and place it in the left compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE2 pick up the book and place it in the right compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE2 pick up the book and place it in the back compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE2 pick up the book and place it in the front compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE3 pick up the book and place it in the left compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE3 pick up the book and place it in the right compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE3 pick up the book and place it in the front compartment of the caddy STUDY SCENE3 pick up the white mug and place it to the right of the caddy STUDY SCENE3 pick up the red mug and place it to the right of the caddy STUDY SCENE4 pick up the book on the right and place it under the cabinet shelf STUDY SCENE4 pick up the book in the middle and place it on the cabinet shelf STUDY SCENE4 pick up the book on the left and place it on top of the shelf STUDY SCENE4 pick up the book on the right and place it on the cabinet shelf LIVING ROOM SCENE3 pick up the alphabet soup and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE3 pick up the tomato sauce and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE3 pick up the butter and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE3 pick up the cream cheese and put it in the tray LIVING ROOM SCENE3 pick up the ketchup and put it in the tray KITCHEN SCENE1 open the top drawer of the cabinet and put the bowl in it LIVING ROOM SCENE1 pick up the ketchup and put it in the basket STUDY SCENE1 pick up the book and place it in the left compartment of the caddy KITCHEN SCENE3 turn on the stove and put the frying pan on it 

TABLE XVI: Meta-World ML45 Training Task List 

Category Tasks 

Pick & Place pick-place, pick-place-wall, pick-out-of-hole, shelf-place, bin-picking Push/Press push, stick-push, coffee-push, push-wall, handle-press-side, handle-press, button-press-wall, button-press-topdown, button-press-topdown-wall, button-press, lever-pull, stick-pull, handle-pull-side, handle-pull, coffee-pull, push-back Open & Close faucet-open, faucet-close, window-close, window-open, door-open, door-close, drawer-close, drawer-open, box-close Others sweep, assembly, dial-turn, coffee-button, basketball, sweep-into, disassemble, hammer, plate-slide, plate-slide-side, soccer, plate-slide-back-side, plate-slide-back, reach, reach-wall, peg-insert-side, peg-unplug-side, hand-insert, door-lock, door-unlock