Title: HyperSim: A Holistic Sim-To-Real Framework For Robust Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26638v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:50:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# HyperSim: A Holistic Sim-To-Real Framework For Robust Robotic Manipulation 

Junyi Dong 1,∗,†, Haotian Luo 1,∗, Ziwei Xu 1, Shengwei Bian 1, Heng Zhang 1, Sitong Mao 1, Jingyi Guo 1,Yang Xu 1, Wenhao Chen 1, Qiuyu Feng 1, Yao Mu 2, Ping Luo 3, Shunbo Zhou 1, and Xiaodong Wu 1 

> 1

CloudRobo Lab, Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co.,Ltd.,  

> 2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The University of Hong Kong  

> ∗

Equal contribution † Corresponding authors 

Fig. 1. Requiring minimal human-collected data (a one-time environment scan and a few dozen demonstrations), our method reconstructs photorealistic and geometrically accurate environments to generate adversarial trajectories for policy training. Evaluated using both ACT and π0 policies, our approach consistently outperforms the ablated baselines under both zero-shot and few-shot deployments. 

Abstract —Scaling data volume and diversity is critical for gen-eralizing embodied intelligence. While synthetic data generation offers a scalable alternative to expensive physical data acquisition, transferring robotic manipulation policies from simulation to the real world (sim-to-real) remains a formidable challenge due to the domain gap. This paper presents HyperSim, a holistic framework spanning from synthetic data generation to policy training and seamless real-world deployment. To systematically bridge the sim-to-real gap, HyperSim is realized through three core pillars: high-fidelity environment synthesis, adversarial tra-jectory generation, and sim-and-real co-training. Collectively, these modules address domain discrepancies by enhancing visual fidelity, expanding data coverage, and enforcing domain-invariant representations. We rigorously validate HyperSim through alarge-scale empirical study involving 400 real-world task exe-cutions across two representative manipulation models. Assessed across three fine-grained metrics, our complete pipeline achieves remarkable sim-to-real success rates of 80% and 95% with ACT and π0, respectively. Furthermore, policies trained on our adversarial trajectories exhibit significantly enhanced robustness against dynamic uncertainties, achieving a 35% higher comple-tion rate under physical perturbations. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Driven by recent breakthroughs in multimodal large models, the field of robotics is undergoing a paradigm shift from mod-ular skill learning to data-driven, end-to-end policy learning [1], [2]. However, unlike foundation models in vision and language that can directly leverage vast internet-scale data, embodied agents require paired action-observation sequences that encompass detailed physical interactions. Acquiring such high-quality robotic datasets necessitates substantial invest-ments in hardware infrastructure and human labor [3]–[5]. Consequently, with the exponential growth in model param-eters and data hunger of emerging robot foundation models [6], [7], relying exclusively on real-world data collection has become increasingly impractical. Synthetic data offers a promising solution to circumvent this data bottleneck. While automated generation pipelines have made data acquisition in simulation highly efficient, existing methodologies [3], [8]–[13] suffer from three critical limita-tions. First, simulation environments are often oversimplified, typically featuring a floating table against a void background, which fails to reflect the cluttered and unstructured nature of real-world environments. Second, data diversity is constrained due to heuristic scene configurations (e.g., fixing object orien-tations to artificially reduce task complexity) and the predomi-nance of homogeneous, successful-only trajectories. Together, 

> arXiv:2605.26638v1 [cs.RO] 26 May 2026

these factors severely restrict the coverage of the state-action manifold. Third, the persistent visual and dynamic mismatch between simulation and reality continues to degrade real-world performance. Consequently, policies trained solely on simula-tion data often fail to generalize to physical environments, leaving effective sim-to-real transfer a non-trivial challenge. To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we introduce HyperSim, a holistic framework spanning from synthetic data generation to policy training and seamless real-world deploy-ment. HyperSim features a two-layer design that strategically separates scalable data generation from advanced domain transfer. The base layer establishes a procedural workflow: it synthesizes physically plausible and diverse scenes, and decou-ples complex tasks into distinct motion and interaction prim-itives for efficient trajectory generation. Building upon this, the enhancement layer adopts a modular paradigm to system-atically bridge the sim-to-real gap through three mechanisms. First, to mitigate visual discrepancies, we employ geometry-aware Gaussian Splatting (GS), rendering environments with photorealism and geometric fidelity superior to traditional meshes. Second, we inject state perturbations during trajectory synthesis to capture observations from diverse viewpoints and record recovery behaviors. This adversarial mechanism ex-pands the state-action coverage for policy robustness. Finally, a sim-and-real co-training strategy is applied to enforce learning of domain-invariant representations across paired observations and actions. We validate the proposed framework through extensive physical experiments on the Galaxy R1 platform. Assessed across a set of fine-grained metrics, HyperSim demonstrates robust sim-to-real transferability. In summary, our main contributions are as follows.  

> •

We introduce HyperSim , a comprehensive framework that systematically bridges the sim-to-real gap via high-fidelity scene construction, expanded state-action cover-age, and cross-domain co-training.  

> •

We propose a hybrid scene synthesis strategy along-side an adversarial trajectory generation mechanism .Together, they efficiently procedurally generate diverse, photorealistic scenes while injecting dynamic physical perturbations to expand the state-action manifold and enforce policy recovery.  

> •

We demonstrate exceptional real-world transferability through systematic physical evaluations . Our analysis reveals that policy performance is positively correlated with synthetic data fidelity and distribution coverage, and is further boosted by pre-trained foundation models and co-training. Overall, the complete HyperSim pipeline achieves an impressive zero-shot success rate of 75% and few-shot success rate of 95% with π0 policies. In addition, our adversarial mechanism endows the policies with enhanced robustness, yielding a 35% improvement under external physical disturbances. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Environment Construction For Robotics Simulation 

High-fidelity simulation environments are pivotal for miti-gating the visual sim-to-real gap in embodied learning. Exist-ing approaches face a fundamental trade-off between visual realism and physical interactivity, occupying two ends of a spectrum. At one end, procedural generation techniques [8], [12], [14] excel in scalability and are well-suited for synthesizing physically interactive scenes. However, they often lack photorealism and rely on randomization strategies that fail to capture the unstructured clutter of the real world. At the opposite end, neural rendering methods such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15]–[17] offer unparalleled photorealism but are hampered by ambiguous scale estimation and noisy geometric meshes, which are detrimental to contact-rich sim-ulations [18]. In contrast, we propose a hybrid approach that leverages geometry-aware 3DGS solely for complex back-ground reconstruction while utilizing a constraint-aware gener-ator for the foreground manipulation zone. This ensures both visual-physical alignment and the diversity of manipulation workspaces. 

B. Scaling Trajectory Generation In Simulation 

Unlike computer vision and natural language processing, where models are typically trained on images or texts, embod-ied intelligence relies on paired action-observation sequences, commonly referred to as trajectories. As such, trajectory gener-ation represents a unique and pivotal challenge fundamental to embodied AI research. Prior efforts can be broadly categorized into demonstration augmentation and piece-wise generation. The augmentation approaches exemplified by MimicGen and its successors [3], [9], [19], [20] expand a few human demon-strations into thousands of trajectories by applying spatial transformation and interpolation to seed data. However, such augmentation strategy is prone to generate non-smooth tra-jectories with discontinuous changes. Conversely, piece-wise generation like RoboTwin [12], RoboGen [8] and InternData-A1 [14] decompose tasks into distinct motion and skill primi-tives. These primitives are then independently synthesized via motion planners, constrained optimization, or reinforcement learning leveraging privileged simulation states. Our method falls into the second category with a novel design that injects perturbations into object states and induces recovery motions. The resulting adversarial trajectories enable robots to acquire richer observations that are crucial for policy generalization. 

C. Sim-To-Real Transfer 

The objective of sim-to-real transfer is to deploy robotic control policies trained in simulation to physical hardware by mitigating the inherent visual and dynamic discrepancies between the two domains. To achieve this, existing literature predominantly relies on domain randomization [12] or system identification [12]. However, these methods often require do-main expertise and tedious trial-and-error to tune parameters such as randomization ranges or dynamics coefficients. Alter-natively, co-training adopts a different philosophy by jointly optimizing robot policies over a mixture of simulated and real-world data [21]–[23], forcing the extraction and learning of domain-invariant representations. Our key insight is that the brittleness of the robot policy in real world generaliza-tion arises from the combined factors such as mismatches in environment complexity and data distribution, as well as the visual and physics discrepancy. Therefore, we seek to address these issues synergistically in a holistic framework with systematic experiments and investigations, rather than individually handling them. III. T HE PROPOSED APPROACH 

HyperSim is a holistic framework encompassing synthetic data generation, policy training, and real-world deployment (Fig. 2). To systematically close the sim-to-real gap, it inte-grates three functional modules: high-fidelity scene construc-tion for visual alignment, adversarial trajectory synthesis for expanded state-action coverage, and co-training for domain-invariant representations. To seamlessly accommodate these capabilities, HyperSim adopts a flexible two-layer architecture. Specifically, a base layer drives the standard data pipeline, while a customizable enhancement layer flexibly integrates the aforementioned advanced sim-to-real transfer techniques. We elaborate on these three functional components below. 

A. High-Fidelity Simulation Environment 

Our approach introduces a hybrid synthesis strategy where the simulation environment explicitly consists of two com-ponents: a foreground manipulation area and a surrounding background. This decoupling allows us to efficiently generate diverse, physically plausible workspaces in the foreground, which are seamlessly embedded within the photorealistic and geometrically accurate background. For the interactive foreground, we move beyond randomized scene generation to enable precise spatial relation modeling. As illustrated in Fig.3, we design a library of 18 solvers which are categorized into three groups: unary geometric priors, ex-plicit pairwise relations, and implicit multi-object formations. The task-specific foreground requirements are translated into a subset of these spatial constraints to generate a valid layout. This synthesized layout is subsequently populated with high-fidelity 3D assets retrieved from established databases or gen-erated by text-to-3D models to ensure physical interactivity. Detailed constraints explanations are deferred to the Appendix VII-A. Complementary to the interactive foreground, our back-ground reconstruction minimizes the visual sim-to-real gap. We collect synchronized multimodal data (RGB, LiDAR, and IMU) and leverage GPGS [24]—an state-of-art approach which exploits geometric priors derived from fused LiDAR scans, to reconstruct the environment into a set of Gaussian primitives. Incorporating geometric priors effectively alleviates the challenge of precise surface reconstruction for weakly textured or complex geometries, overcoming a key limitation of image-only approaches. Guided by the optimization scheme proposed in [24], the Gaussian primitives are spatially aligned with the surfaces defined by fused LiDAR scans, enabling high-fidelity novel view synthesis of both color and depth maps. The parameters of Gaussian primitives, including their position pk, covariance matrix Σ, opacity ok and spherical harmonics coefficients ck which encapsulate view-dependent appearance, can be calculated by [15]: 

G(p) = exp (− 12 (p − pk)T Σ−1(p − pk)) (1) During volumetric rendering, each 3D Gaussian is projected to the image plane as G2D , then depth-sorted and alpha-blended into the final image expressed as pixel color values: 

c(x) = 

> K

X

> k=1

ckokG2D (x)

> k−1

Y

> j=1

(1 − oj G2D (x)) (2) The pixel depth values can be rendered by sharing asimilar strategy as above. Once the Gaussian representation is constructed, we leverage TSDF algorithm to fuse rendered color and depth maps and generate a colorized mesh struc-turally aligned with the Gaussian representation. Crucially, this hybrid Gaussian-mesh representation natively integrates with standard physics simulators: the 3D Gaussian splats facilitate photorealistic rendering, while the strictly aligned underlying meshes serve as a robust backend for precise collision and contact dynamics. 

B. Adversarial Trajectory 

To generate adversarial trajectories, we first decompose manipulation tasks into piecewise motion primitives. Subse-quently, we introduce a controlled perturbation-and-recovery process during trajectory synthesis, which expands the state-action distribution and induces recovery behaviors. 

1) Piecewise Trajectory Generation: Inspired by prior liter-ature [9], [19], [20], we decompose manipulation tasks into a sequence of object-centric subtasks. Let FA denote the object-centric Cartesian frame, with its origin OA located at the target object’s center of mass and its xy -plane parallel to the workspace surface. Assuming the use of a standard two-finger gripper, we define the tool frame FT with its origin OT at the Tool Center Point (TCP). By convention, the x-axis points toward the fingertips, the y-axis aligns with the gripper stroke connecting the two fingers, and the z-axis follows the right-hand rule, as shown in Fig.4. A typical manipulation subtask begins with a collision-free motion toward the target, which transitions into a transient state before physical contact occurs. Inspired by prior works [19], [20], we formalize this transient state as the bottleneck pose , defined as the specific configuration where the TCP enters a small hemisphere of radius d centered at OA ( Fig.4). Defining the bottleneck pose effectively partitions a ma-nipulation subtask into two phases: an approaching primitive 

spanning from the initial state to the bottleneck pose, and a subsequent interaction primitive governing the object contact and manipulation. Consequently, complete subtask trajectories can be synthesized in a piecewise manner utilizing a com-bination of motion planners, inverse kinematics solvers, and Fig. 2. Overview of the HyperSim framework . HyperSim couples a standard data-to-policy pipeline with an enhancement layer to support physical deployment. By integrating high-fidelity environments, adversarial trajectories, and co-training, HyperSim systematically bridges the sim-to-real gap in visual fidelity, data coverage, and cross-domain feature representation   

> Fig. 3. Spatial relation constraints used for foreground scene generation.

xy Object frame 

ℱ𝐀 

rame ℱ𝐀 

xyz

𝐀 𝐀 

𝐀 ′

𝐀 ′

z′

𝐀 𝐀 

frame 

ℱ𝐀 

xyz

𝐀 𝐀 

𝐀 ′

𝐀 ′

z′

𝐀 𝐀 

Object frame 

ℱ𝐀 

TCP frame ℱ𝐀 

d

Bottleneck Pose    

> Fig. 4. The bottleneck pose and local coordinate frames . The gripper TCP enters a small hemisphere of radius dwith respect to the target object.

gripper controllers [12], [14]. An illustrative example of these segmented primitives is provided in Fig.5. 

2) Adversarial Perturbation And Recovery: Building upon this piecewise formulation, we propose a mechanism to inject abrupt perturbations into the target’s state (both translation and rotation) when the gripper reaches the bottleneck pose, as illustrated in Fig.5. This abrupt alteration of the target’s state forces the motion planner to dynamically compute a recovery trajectory toward a newly updated bottleneck pose, necessitating continuous repositioning and reorientation of the end-effector. This perturbation-recovery cycle serves a dual purpose: it significantly broadens the spatial coverage of the target’s state distribution, and it exposes exteroceptive sensors (e.g., the wrist camera) to a highly diverse set of viewpoints during the recovery phase. While these adversarial perturba-tions can theoretically be applied recursively, we empirically constrain the maximum number of interventions per trajectory to three in order to balance enhanced data diversity with motion stability and trajectory length.  

> Fig. 5. Adversarial trajectory generation . Using a cup-placement task as an example, the manipulation is decomposed into two subtasks. Within each subtask, trajectories are synthesized piecewise, with perturbations injected at the bottleneck pose to induce robust recovery behaviors.

C. Sim-And-Real Co-Training 

In contrast to explicit match simulation and real world, co-training treats simulation and real-world data as generic data to be sampled together, which encourages the policies to learn invariant features across domains. Let Ds and Dr denote the set of simulation data and real data, respectively, where the quantity of simulation data is orders of magnitude larger than that of the real data, i.e., |D s| ≫ |D r |. Following prior work [21], [22], we formulate the co-training problem as minimizing the behavioral cloning loss 

LDα = αLDs + (1 − α)LDr (3) where α ∈ [0 , 1] is the co-training ratio represents the proba-bility of drawing a training sample from Ds. In the case where 

α = 1 , the model is trained exclusively on simulation data, corresponding to a zero-shot deployment setting. Conversely, under the co-training paradigm, α is set marginally less than 1, representing a few-shot strategy where a small amount of real-world data is utilized. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

The experiments are designed to systematically validate three core hypotheses: (H1) the complete HyperSim pipeline as well as its ablated variants enable direct, zero-shot policy deployment in the real world; (H2) few-shot co-training with minimal human demonstrations synergistically improves pol-icy performance; and (H3) the adversarial trajectory mecha-nism significantly enhances policy robustness against dynamic disturbances. 

A. Experiment Setup 

We conduct real-world experiments on a Galaxea R1 hu-manoid robot with visual observations acquired at 10 Hz from head- and wrist-mounted RGB cameras. The evaluation task mimics a challenging industrial sorting task that requires the robot to transfer a target object (e.g. a red plug) from a central deep bin to one of the two adjacent bins. Note that compared to flat-surface manipulation, deep-bin picking imposes strict kinematic constraints and collision risks, particularly in corner cases where the object rests against the bin walls. To generate adversarial trajectories, we perturb each component of the target 2D position by a random value uniformly drawn from 

[0 .02 , 0.2] m, and the target orientation is randomly sampled from the full range of [−180 , 180] o. We design a fixed evaluation set of 20 trials initialized with various target poses (translation and rotation) and visual distractors to guarantee that the evaluation is of non-trivial difficulty (Fig.6). Besides, this exact setup remains identical across all evaluated policies to ensure fair comparison. 

B. Training Datasets 

To systematically evaluate the contribution of individual modules to policy generalization as well as their compositional effect, we curate several ablated datasets alongside our holistic HyperSim pipeline. We utilize the simulation engine O3DE [25] for its native 3DGS and ROS2 support, although our 

> Fig. 6. Initialization of 20 real-world evaluation trials with varied target poses and distractors in the central bin.

framework is compatible with other popular engines such as IsaacSim and Sapien. Additionally, a minimal set of human demonstrations is collected to investigate sim-real co-training. Overall, the training datasets include:  

> •

BaseSim : Standard synthetic data generated via the base-line workflow  

> •

ADSim : Augments BaseSim with adversarial perturba-tion and recovery mechanisms  

> •

3DGS-ADSim : Enhances ADSim with high-fidelity 3DGS rendering  

> •

Real N : A purely real-world dataset comprising N human demonstrations  

> •

Real N &BaseSim / Real N &ADSim : Co-training mix-tures combining Real N with their respective simulated counterparts  

> •

HyperSim , or Real N &3DGS-ADSim : The comprehen-sive dataset integrating all proposed modules in our pipeline 

C. Evaluation Protocol 

Robotic manipulation policies are conventionally evaluated on the basis of task success rate. However, this binary metric often fails to capture the true competence of a policy, as it treats all failure modes indiscriminately. In fact, a failure that occurs after completing a critical step such as reaching the bottleneck pose represents a higher level of capability than a complete failure. Therefore, we introduce three fine-grained metrics to provide a more nuanced assessment:  

> •

Target Alignment Rate (TAR): The success rate of the end-effector accurately navigating from its initial state to the target’s bottleneck pose.  

> •

First-Attempt Success Rate (SR 1): The percentage of tri-als successfully completed in a single continuous attempt without any retries.  

> •

Overall Success Rate (SR 3): The percentage of trials successfully completed within three attempts. Under this protocol, we evaluated two representative poli-cies, ACT and π0, with a rigorous total of more than 400 real-world trials. V. S IM TO REAL STUDY 

This section details our extensive real-world empirical eval-uation. We first assess the zero-shot sim-to-real transferability of our generated data. Subsequently, we demonstrate the synergistic performance gains achieved through few-shot co-training. We conclude by subjecting the policies to dynamic environmental perturbations to rigorously validate their robust-ness. 

A. Zero-Shot Transfer 

We evaluate the zero-shot sim-to-real transfer capabilities by fine-tuning two representative policies, ACT and π0, on datasets generated by the ablated variants of HyperSim. The quantitative results in Table I yield two critical insights.                             

> TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ZERO -SHOT DEPLOYMENTS
> Training Data Policy TAR SR 1SR 3
> BaseSim ACT 10% 5% 5% ADSim ACT 45% 10% 15%
> 3DGS-ADSim ACT 55 %20 %25 %BaseSim π045% 45% 55% ADSim π075% 60% 70%
> 3DGS-ADSim π080 %60 %75 %
> ∗3DGS-ADSim: zero-shot configuration of HyperSim

Impact of visual fidelity and adversarial diversity . The progressive integration of the enhancement modules (BaseSim 

→ ADSim → 3DGS-ADSim) consistently boosts perfor-mance. To begin with, the introduction of ADSim substantially elevates the target alignment rate (TAR). We posit that policies trained solely on static demonstrations tend to overfit to initial states, failing to leverage real-time visual feedback. In contrast, the adversarial mechanism exposes the policies to sudden target displacements at the grasping bottleneck. This intervention not only yields a broader and more uniform target state distribution, as shown in Fig.7, but also forces the policies to learn closed-loop visuo-motor alignment. Complementarily, integrating 3DGS rendering yields an additional performance gain of up to 10% across all metrics. This shows that high-fidelity rendering more effectively grounds synthetic obser-vations in physical reality, mitigating the visual domain gap (Fig.8). Furthermore, the drop in the first-attempt success SR 1

is primarily caused by initial execution errors such as minor collisions with bin-walls or unstable grasps. However, with up to three retries, the policies can recover up to 15% of performance in the overall success rate (SR 3). 

Synergy Between Foundation Models and Synthetic Data . It is interesting to note that under identical training conditions, π0 significantly outperforms ACT by a substantial 25–55% margin across all experiments and metrics. Despite the collision-prone nature of the deep-bin configuration and highly varied testing scenes, π0 achieves an impressive SR 3

of 75%. This underscores a key takeaway: the generalization Huawei Proprietary  - Restricted Distribution 1                    

> (a)
> (b)
> BaseSim
> ADSim
> 030 60 90 120 150 180 -180 -150 -120 -90 -60 -30
> 70
> 60
> 50
> 40
> 30
> 20
> 10
> 0
> Orientation [deg]
> Count
> BaseSim
> ADSim
> Target 2D Pose Distribution
> Target Orientation Distribution
> max_x
> min_y
> min_x
> max_y
> Fig. 7. Comparison of target 2D pose distribution (a) and orientation distribution (b) . The 2D poses in BaseSim are heavily concentrated at the workspace center, forming an elongated pattern. In contrast, ADSim expands these poses across the entire workspace to increase the spatial coverage. Similarly, the orientation distribution in BaseSim is skewed toward the [0 ,180 o]interval, while ADSim provides a more uniform distribution. Huawei Proprietary -Restricted Distribution 1
> (a) (b) (c)
> Fig. 8. Comparison of robot head-camera observations . Compared to the real-world observation (a), BaseSim and ADSim generate observations in a clean background (b), whereas 3DGS-ADSim (c) provides aligned observations with complex background details.

priors inherent in large-scale pre-trained models act syner-gistically with our high-quality synthetic data, dramatically lowering the zero-shot sim-to-real barrier. 

B. Few-Shot Co-Training Efficacy 

We evaluate the efficacy of few-shot co-training by in-tegrating a small set of 35 human demonstrations to the training data. Results in Table. II demonstrate that co-training consistently outperforms simulation-only baselines for both ACT and π0 policies. We observe that the driving factors for these improvements differ based on model capacity. For the ACT policy that exhibits limited zero-shot transferability, co-training with real data provides essential physical grounding to effectively bridge the sim-to-real gap, especially in contact dynamics, driving a substantial increase of over 35% in both SR 1 and SR 3 in comparison to zero-shot deployment. Conversely, the π0 foundation model already exhibits strong zero-shot capabilities. In this context, co-training with real data further narrows the sim-to-real gap. This process enhances the model’s overall performance, elevating all metrics by over 15% and bringing the SR 3 to 95%. Moreover, co-training policies exceed the performance of their real-only counterparts (Table. III), indicating that our high-quality synthetic data effectively augment the limited number of human demonstrations for policy learning.                                                 

> TABLE II PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF FEW -SHOT DEPLOYMENTS
> Training Data Policy TAR SR 1SR 3
> ADSim ACT 45% 10% 15% Real35&ADSim ACT 85% 65% 75% 3DGS-ADSim ACT 55% 20% 25%
> Real35&3DGS-ADSim ACT 85 %65 %80 %ADSim π075% 60% 70% Real35&ADSim π090% 65% 85% 3DGS-ADSim π080% 60% 75%
> Real35&3DGS-ADSim π095 %75 %95 %
> ∗Real35&3DGS-ADSim: few-shot configuration of HyperSim TABLE III PERFORMANCE OF REAL -ONLY BASELINES
> Training Data Policy TAR SR 1SR 3
> Real35 ACT 70% 45% 60% Real35 π085% 70% 70%

C. Dynamic Robustness 

We design a dynamic perturbation test to assess policy ro-bustness, an aspect often under-explored in prior work. While scene initialization remains the same as previous experiments (Fig. 4), a human operator abruptly alters the target object’s state during online policy inference. We record the TAR and SR 1 to evaluate the direct policy response against pertur-bations. As shown in Table.IV, policies trained with adver-sarial trajectories (both Real35&ADSim and Real35&3DGS-ADSim) exhibit superior robustness with SR 1 being 60% compared to 25% achieved by the non-adversarial counterpart (Real35&BaseSim). This improvement stems from the adver-sarial mechanism, which inherently incorporates dynamic un-certainties into the training data, thereby enforcing a stronger capability to recover from perturbations during inference.             

> TABLE IV PERFORMANCE COMPARISON AGAINST DYNAMIC PERTURBATIONS
> Training Data Policy TAR SR 1
> Real35&BaseSim π030% 25% Real35&ADSim π080% 60% Real35&3DGS-ADSim π080 %60 %

VI. C ONCLUSION , L IMITATION , AND FUTURE WORK 

This paper presents HyperSim, a systematic framework designed to bridge the sim-to-real gap for vision-based robotic manipulation under zero-shot and few-shot paradigms. By integrating high-fidelity environment construction, adversarial trajectory generation, and sim-and-real co-training, our ap-proach mitigates discrepancies across visual rendering, state-space distribution, and data representation. Our extensive evaluation across a suite of fine-grained metrics yields three takeaways. First, data fidelity and coverage are pivotal to successful sim-to-real transfer. Second, large-scale pre-trained foundation models, high-quality synthetic data, and co-training exhibit profound synergies. Third, training with adversarial data that inherently incorporates dynamic uncertainties leads to a stronger capability to recover from perturbations during inference. Despite these advances, we acknowledge that limitations exist in the current scope. The hardware safety constraints associated with the collision-prone deep-container manipula-tion, coupled with the resource-intensive nature of physical evaluation, have currently constrained our empirical validation to a specific task suite and a single humanoid embodiment. Consequently, our immediate future work will focus on scaling the HyperSim pipeline across a broader spectrum of complex manipulation tasks and diverse robotic morphologies. Ulti-mately, we aim to open-source the HyperSim pipeline as well as the generated dataset to further solidify the role of data synthesis as a cornerstone for generalized Embodied AI. VII. A PPENDIX 

A. Spatial Relation Constraints For Foreground Generation 

We introduce 18 distinct spatial relation constraints to generate fine-grained manipulation regions in a controllable manner. The names and descriptions of these constraints are detailed in Table. V. 

B. Additional Real World Experiments 

We conducted a group of experiments comparing co-training performance with the real-only baselines. We train policies us-ing a fixed set of 400 simulation trajectories while varying the number of real-world demonstrations. The evaluation results are presented in Table.VI. As expected, performance scales positively with real-world data quantity for both real-only and co-trained policies. More importantly, the co-trained policies consistently surpass their real-only counterpart. This suggests that our high-quality synthetic data act as a complementary data source, effectively preventing the policies from overfitting to the limited real-world demonstrations. REFERENCES [1] M. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burch-fiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn, “Open-vla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [2] S. Liu, L. Wu, B. Li, H. Tan, H. Chen, Z. Wang, K. Xu, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipula-tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864 , 2024. TABLE V SPATIAL RELATION CONSTRAINTS 

Name Description 

scale(OBJ, RANGE) scale OBJ within the RANGE pose2D(OBJ, RANGE) randomize OBJ 2D pose within the RANGE pose3D(OBJ, RANGE) randomize OBJ 3D pose within the RANGE place on surface(OBJ, REF) place OBJ on top of REFERENCE place left edge(OBJ, REF) place OBJ near the left edge of the REFERENCE place right edge(OBJ, REF) place OBJ near the right edge of the REFERENCE place top edge(OBJ, REF) place OBJ near the top edge of the REFERENCE place bottom edge(OBJ, REF) place OBJ near the bottom edge of the REFERENCE place to left(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the left of the REFERENCE place to right(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the right of the REFERENCE place in right(OBJ, REF) place OBJ in front of REFERENCE place behind(OBJ, REF) place OBJ behind REFERENCE place front left(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the front-left of the REFERENCE place front right(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the front-right of the REFERENCE place back left(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the back-left of the REFERENCE place back right(OBJ, REF) place OBJ to the back-right of the REFERENCE random placement(OBJs, REF) place multiple OBJs randomly inside the REFERENCE no overlapping(OBJs, REF) place multiple non-overlapped OBJs inside the REFERENCE with obstacles(OBJ, OBS, REF) place OBJ with OBSTACLES inside the REFERENCE TABLE VI COMPARISON OF REAL -O NLY AND CO-T RAINED POLICIES 

Training Data Policy TAR SR 1 SR 3

Real10 π0 70% 35% 45% Real20 π0 85% 40% 45% Real35 π0 85% 70% 70% Real10&ADSim π0 75% 35% 55% Real20&ADSim π0 85% 55% 65% Real35&ADSim π0 90% 65% 85% Real35&3DGS-ADSim π0 95% 75% 95% [3] S. Nasiriany, A. Maddukuri, L. Zhang, A. Parikh, A. Lo, A. Joshi, A. Mandlekar, and Y. Zhu, “Robocasa: Large-scale simulation of ev-eryday tasks for generalist robots,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [4] K. Wu, C. Hou, J. Liu, Z. Che, X. Ju, Z. Yang, M. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, G. Yang et al. , “Robomind: Benchmark on multi-embodiment intelligence normative data for robot manipulation,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) 2025 .Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss21/p152.pdf [5] H. Fan, H. Dai, J. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Yan, Y. Zhao, M. Gao, J. Wu, H. Tang, and H. Dong, “Twinaligner: Visual-dynamic alignment empowers physics-aware real2sim2real for robotic manipulation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.19390 [6] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, M. Y. Galliker, D. Ghosh, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, D. LeBlanc, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg, K. Stachowicz, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, H. Walke, A. Walling, H. Wang, L. Yu, and U. Zhilinsky, “ π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16054 [7] G. A. Team, “Gen-0: Embodied foundation models that scale with physical interaction,” Generalist AI Blog , 2025, https://generalistai.com/blog/nov-04-2025-GEN-0. [8] Y. Wang, Z. Xian, F. Chen, T.-H. Wang, Y. Wang, K. Fragkiadaki, Z. Erickson, D. Held, and C. Gan, “Robogen: Towards unleashing infinite data for automated robot learning via generative simulation,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01455 , 2023. [9] A. Mandlekar, S. Nasiriany, B. Wen, I. Akinola, Y. Narang, L. Fan, Y. Zhu, and D. Fox, “Mimicgen: A data generation system for scalable robot learning using human demonstrations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17596 , 2023. [10] H. Ha, P. Florence, and S. Song, “Scaling up and distilling down: Language-guided robot skill acquisition,” 2023. [11] P. Hua, M. Liu, A. Macaluso, Y. Lin, W. Zhang, H. Xu, and L. Wang, “Gensim2: Scaling robot data generation with multi-modal and reason-ing llms,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .[12] T. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chen, Z. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Q. Liang, X. Lin, Y. Ge, Z. Gu et al. , “Robotwin 2.0: A scalable data generator and benchmark with strong domain randomization for robust bimanual robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18088 , 2025. [13] H. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Dong, H. Zhang, S. Mao, H. Wang, W. Wu, and S. Zhou, “Ascent: Autonomous skill learning toward complex embodied tasks with foundation models,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 16 752–16 758. [14] Y. Tian, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, Z. Cai, X. Shi, N. Gao, H. Liu, X. Jiang, Z. Qiu, F. Yuan, Y. Li, P. Wang, J. Cai, J. Zeng, H. Dong, and J. Pang, “Interndata-a1: Pioneering high-fidelity synthetic data for pre-training generalist policy,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.16651 [15] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimkuehler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 42, no. 4, Jul. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3592433 [16] B. Huang, Z. Yu, A. Chen, A. Geiger, and S. Gao, “2d gaussian splatting for geometrically accurate radiance fields,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , ser. SIGGRAPH ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657428 [17] D. Chen, H. Li, W. Ye, Y. Wang, W. Xie, S. Zhai, N. Wang, H. Liu, H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Pgsr: Planar-based gaussian splatting for efficient and high-fidelity surface reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 6100–6111, 2025. [18] S. Yang, W. Yu, J. Zeng, J. Lv, K. Ren, C. Lu, D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Novel demonstration generation with gaussian splatting enables robust one-shot manipulation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13175 [19] E. Johns, “Coarse-to-fine imitation learning: Robot manipulation from a single demonstration,” in 2021 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 4613–4619. [20] N. Di Palo and E. Johns, “Learning multi-stage tasks with one demon-stration via self-replay,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2022, pp. 1180–1189. [21] A. Wei, A. Agarwal, B. Chen, R. Bosworth, N. Pfaff, and R. Tedrake, “Empirical analysis of sim-and-real cotraining of diffusion policies for planar pushing from pixels,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.22634 [22] A. Maddukuri, Z. Jiang, L. Y. Chen, S. Nasiriany, Y. Xie, Y. Fang, W. Huang, Z. Wang, Z. Xu, N. Chernyadev, S. Reed, K. Goldberg, A. Mandlekar, L. Fan, and Y. Zhu, “Sim-and-real co-training: A sim-ple recipe for vision-based robotic manipulation,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2025. [23] J. Yang, C. Finn, and D. Sadigh, “Invariance co-training for robot visual generalization,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05230 [24] Z. Xu, W. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Ouyang, S. Bian, and S. Zhou, “Gpgs: Geometric priors for 3d gaussian splatting in structural environments,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2025, pp. 15 695–15 702. [25] Open 3D Foundation, “O3DE Documentation,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://docs.o3de.org